Course & Exam Modules

Course Objectives

The purpose of this course is to:

Learn what the FCRA is and how it affects your job

Understand the obligations of data users under the FCRA

Develop the knowledge and skills needed to comply effectively with the FCRA

Add to your professional growth

Course Modules

The curriculum is divided into 14 Modules:

Module 1

Module 2

Module 3

Module 4

Module 5.

Module 6.

Security

Module 7

History of the FCRA

Consumer Reports

Permissible Purposes

Prescreening

Adverse Action & Risk-based Pricing

Disposal of Information & Data

Medical Information

Module 8: Notice of Address Discrepancy

Module 9. Fraud Alert Duties for Lenders

Module 10: Identity Theft Red Flags Rule

Module 1 1: Employment Reports &

Background Screening

Module 12. Investigative Consumer Reports

Module 13: Enforcement & Remedies

Module 14: Taking the Final Exam

Grading Information

When you complete the course:

You may choose to start taking the final exam or go back to review the training

material again.

The final exam has 25 questions.

These questions are "true or false" and "multiple choice.

Once you have entered the "Taking the Final Exam" session you must complete

the exam.

You must achieve a passing score of 80% or higher (answer at least 20

questions correctly).


Module 1: History of the FCRA
Growth of consumer credits after WW2, 1960- access to credit cards and revolving credit. National networks of credit reporting companies arise as people are more mobile AND the rise of database technology.

FCRA - Congress recognition in late 1960s. Congress is concerned about the credit bureau collecting huge information. Also recognize the advantage, so not to jeopardize (to expose to danger or risk) the reporting agencies.
Maintain consumer rights while growing the credit reporting industry.
Fairness, impartiality and respect to the privacy of consumers.

Permissible purpose is established when a consumer report is pulled associated with a credit transaction.

FCRA (Rights and responsibilities for…)
 Consumers and Consumer Reporting Agencies):

The FCRA Today

The FCRA:

Provides consumers with rights to:

Access data about them held by the

Consumer Reporting Agencies

Correct data in CRA files that is

inaccurate or incomplete

Imposes obligations when taking

"adverse action. "

Imposes duties on "consumer reporting

agencies" to:

Protect consumer data

Adhere to "permissible purpose"

requirements

Maintain reasonable data accuracy

procedures and investigate upon consumer

Include certain data in consumer reports

Exclude other data from consumer reports

Requires data furnishers to investigate

disputed information.


Module 2: Consumer Reports

Consumer Report Definition
Consumer Reporting Agency Definition
What is NOT consumer report
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act Definition

Consumer Reports

The module "What is a Consumer Report?" contains the following subsections:

You must access each subsection sequentially. Click on a button below to access each subsection.

Noos

What is a Consumer Report?

What is a Consumer Reporting Agency?

What is Not a Consumer Report?

Gramm-Leach-BIiIey Act


Consumer Report Definition
Section 603(d)(1) - FCRA Law
Definitions

As an individual that works with the FCRA, the federal law regulating

consumer reporting, it's critical that you are familiar with some of the basic

definitions contained in the law.

"Consumer Report":

Defines the class of data that is regulated under the law

Triggers obligations for.

• CRAs

Users of consumer reports

Data Furnishers


FCRA Law: Section

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(d)(1): Definition of a Consumer Report

(1) In general.

The term "consumer report" means any written, oral, or other

communication of any information by a consumer reporting agency bearing

on a consumer's credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity,

character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living

which is used or expected to be used or collected in whole or in part for the

purpose of serving as a factor in establishing the consumer's eligibility for:

(A) credit or insurance to be used primarily for personal, family, or

(B) employment purposes; or

(C) any other purpose authorized under Section 604.


Section 603(d)(1) - Explanation

Explanation of Section 603(d)(1)

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 603(d)(1) - Definition of a Consumer Report

The term "consumer report" is the most important in the FCRA. Understanding

this concept will aid in your understanding of the statutory scheme. It might

help if we separate the definition into its constituent parts:

(1) A communication of any information by a consumer reporting agency

To be a consumer report, information must be communicated to you by a

"consumer reporting agency." If the communication does not come from a

"consumer reporting agency," it is not a consumer report. We will discuss the
definition of "consumer reporting agency/' in the next subsection.

It is important to note that, even though this statute is entitled the Fair Credit

Reporting Act, it is about much more than credit reports and credit transactions.

A consumer report can be any information, not just classic "credit report"

information, such as information about credit accounts. For example,

consumer report information could be public record information (such as

information about liens, judgments or bankruptcies), criminal history, motor

vehicle records, check-cashing history or apartment rental history.

A "credit bureau" is but one species of "consumer reporting agency; others
include background screening companies, tenant screening companies, or

check verification firms.

(2) Bearing on a consumer's credit worthiness, credit standing, credit

capacity, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode

of living

A communication of information must bear on one or more of these seven

characteristics to be a consumer report. If it does not bear on one these

factors, it is not considered to be a consumer report. What this means as a

practical matter is that:

Information that bears only a consumer's identity, such as name or Social

Security number, is not generally considered to be a consumer report,

because a consumer's name, by itself, does not tell you anything about the

consumer's credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character,

general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living.

Information that does not identify a consumer-for example because it does

not include identifying information for a specific consumer or because it has

been "aggregated" with information about a group of consumers-does not

bear on an individual consumer in any respect and is not generally

considered to be a consumer report.

information and subject to the restrictions of the FCRA even if it is never actually

used for that purpose.

(4) For the purpose of serving as a factor in establishing the consumer's

eligibility for credit or insurance to be used primarily for personal, family,

or household purposes, employment purposes, or any other "permissible

purpose" authorized under the FCRA.

As we learned in Module One, Congress, in enacting the FCRA, was concerned

about the collection and use of sensitive information to make important

decisions about consumers. As a result, Congress defined the set of data

covered by the FCRA as information that is used or collected for the purpose of

determining the consumer's eligibility for household credit (such as a mortgage

or credit card), household insurance, employment, or any other purpose

authorized under the FCRA. These other purposes include obtaining certain

government benefits, renting an apartment, opening a bank account, or

cashing a check. Thus, if information is expected to be used to determine

whether a consumer can participate in one of these important transactions, it

may be considered to be "consumer report" information.

These purposes are important as well, because they define the permitted uses

of consumer report information. That is, you may obtain a consumer report to

underwrite a consumer's application for credit or insurance, but you generally

may not obtain a consumer report for law enforcement, marketing or similar

purposes that do not concern eligibility determinations.

Of course, this also means that if information is not used or expected to be

used or collected for one of these important purposes, it is not consumer report

information. For example, information collected and used only to determine

the eligibility of businesses to receive credit is not consumer report information.

Information collected and used only for law enforcement purposes is not

consumer report information. And, information collected and used only for

marketing purposes-such as, which consumer is likely to respond to an offer of

a new product, or who should receive a 1 0%-off coupon-is not consumer report

information. By the same token, consumer report information generally may

not be obtained for commercial transactions, law enforcement or marketing.

(There are exceptions to these restrictions, such as the provisions permitting

creditors and insurers to "prescreen" consumers, as well as provisions

permitting consumer reporting agencies to disclose information to combat

terrorism. You will learn more about the requirements surrounding

"prescreening ' in Module 4.)

Knowledge Check
A consumer’s driving record could be considered a type of consumer report.
TRUE

Consumer Reporting Agency 
Only when you provide information to a “consumer reporting agency” will the data furnisher obligations of the FCRA apply to you.
Section 603(f) - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Section 6030

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(f): Definition of a Consumer Reporting Agency

(f) The term "consumer reporting agency' means any person which, for

monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in

whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit

information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing

consumer reports to third parties, and which uses any means or facility of

interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing consumer

reports.

Section 603(f) - Explanation


Explanation of Section 603(f)

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 603(d)(1) - Definition of a Consumer Reporting Agency

As with the definition of "consumer report" it might help to unpack the definition

of "consumer reporting agency." A "consumer reporting agency/' is a "person"

(defined as an individual or company) which

(1) for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis

As we learned in Module One, the original consumer reporting agencies were

cooperative ventures of local businesspeople, and were frequently not

organized for profit. Organizations like this that collect and share information

cooperatively among their members persist to this day. As a result, the

definition makes clear that to be a "consumer reporting agency," an

organization need not be a profit-making entity.

(2) regularly engages in whole or in part

To be considered a "consumer reporting agency," a person must regularly

assemble or evaluate data on consumers for the purpose of furnishing

consumer reports to third parties. That is, if an organization does not regularly

engage in this activity, or does so only infrequently and in isolated

circumstances-such as, in connection with the sale of assets-it will not be

considered to be a consumer reporting agency.

(3) in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit

information or other information on consumers

To be considered to be a "consumer reporting agency," a person must assemble

or evaluate information about consumers. If a person simply obtains consumer

report information and delivers it to a third party, such as a courier or delivery

service, that person would not be considered to be a consumer reporting

agency.

There are certain organizations, sometimes referred to as "pass-throughs" that

do not assemble or evaluate anything - they simply collect raw data or reports

assembled by others and deliver them to end-users to make decisions. These

"pass-throughs" are not considered to be consumer reporting agencies.

Other organizations, referred to as "resellers," collect consumer reports from

other sources and merge the reports together to create a single, unitary report.

This is particularly common in the mortgage market. Because these "resellers"

merge together disparate reports to create a new product, they are considered

to "assemble" data on consumers and are treated as consumer reporting

agencies.

(4) for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties.

If a person assembles data about consumers, but the resulting reports are not

"consumer reports" (i.e., the reports do not bear on the seven characteristics

and/or are not expected to be used for eligibility), then the person cannot be a

"consumer reporting agency." Thus, for example, a person that assembles a

marketing database, a law enforcement database, or a commercial credit

database would not be considered to be a consumer reporting agency.

It is important to note that any person can become a consumer reporting

agency if they engage in the relevant activity. No federal registration or licensing

is required.

Thus, there may be persons who provide reports about consumers

that are used to determine the consumer's eligibility for covered transactions,

who may be considered to be "consumer reporting agencies" without realizing it.

Knowledge Check
A non-profit cooperative entity that does not sell reports about consumers, but simply produces reports for the benefit of of its member, is not a “consumer reporting agency”
FALSE
What is NOT Consumer Report?

What is Not a Consumer Report?

You must know:

What is covered by the FCRA

What is not included in the definition of "consumer report.

Section 603(d)(2) - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Section

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(d)(2): Exclusions from the Definition of a Consumer Report

(2) Exclusions

The term "consumer report" does not include:

(A) any--

(i) report containing information solely as to transactions or

experiences between the consumer and the person making the

report;

communication of that information among persons related

by common ownership or affiliated by corporate control; or

communication of other information among persons

(iii)

related by common ownership or affiliated by corporate control, if it

is clearly and conspicuously disclosed to the consumer that the

information may be communicated among such persons and the

consumer is given the opportunity, before the time that the

information is initially communicated, to direct that such information

not be communicated among such persons;

(B) any authorization or approval of a specific extension of credit directly or

indirectly by the issuer of a credit card or similar device

Section 603(d)(2) - Explanation


Explanation of Section 603(d)(2)

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 603(d)(2) - Exclusions from Definition of a Consumer Report

There are several statutory exceptions from the definition of "consumer report."

The most important of these statutory exceptions is a "report containing

information solely as to transactions or experiences between the consumer and

the person making the report." Without this exception, every time a bank

reports to a consumer reporting agency or another third party whether a

borrower pays on time, it would run the risk of becoming a consumer reporting

agency, insofar as the information communicated bears on creditworthiness

and is expected to be used to determine eligibility, and the bank regularly

engages in assembling this information about its customers and providing it to

consumer reporting agencies and other third parties. But, because information

about a person's own "transactions or experiences" can never be "consumer

report" information, the bank cannot become a consumer reporting agency

when it discloses this information to third parties.

In addition, information about transactions or experiences that is shared

among affiliated companies in the same corporate family also is specifically

excluded from the definition of consumer report. This means that if a bank

shares with its affiliated insurance company transaction or experience

information about bank customers, the insurance company may in turn share

that information with another affiliate, such as a securities broker-dealer,

without risk of being considered to be a "consumer reporting agency," even

though the information is not about the insurance company s own transactions

or experiences with the consumer.

Another exception relates to "other information" - i.e., information that is not

"transaction or experience" information, such as credit report information

received from a consumer reporting agency - that is communicated among

affiliated companies after the consumer has been notified "that the information

may be communicated among such persons and the consumer is given the

opportunity, before the time that the information is initially communicated, to

direct that such information not be communicated among such persons." That

is, all information, including consumer report information, can be excluded

from the definition of "consumer report" and the restrictions of the FCRA, if the

information is shared among affiliated companies after the consumer has been

given notice of the sharing and the opportunity to opt out of the sharing. You

may have received one of these so-called "affiliate sharing opt-out notices" from

your bank as a part of its annual privacy notice. These notices frequently say

something like: "You may request that credit report information not be shared

among our affiliated companies."

There are several other important exceptions to the definition of consumer

report, including exceptions for reports made in connection with workplace

investigations, reports made by employment agencies to prospective

employers, and "any authorization or approval of a specific extension of credit

directly or indirectly by the issuer of a credit card or similar device." This last

exception means that credit card and debit card authorizations or non-

authorizations (denials) issued to merchants by payment card networks are not

"consumer reports," requiring "adverse action" notices and consumer dispute

rights.

Knowledge Check
A credit card authorization issue by a payment card network to a merchant could be considered a type of “consumer report”.
FALSE
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act

The Gramm-Leach-BliIey Act

You will learn how the FCRA interacts with the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act,

another important federal financial privacy law.


15 U.S.C. 6802 - GLB Act Law




Gramm-Leach-BliIey Act

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

15 U.S.C. S 6802: Obligations with respect to disclosures of personal

information

(a) Notice requirements

Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, a financial institution may not,

directly or through any affiliate, disclose to a nonaffiliated third party any

nonpublic personal information, unless such financial institution provides or

has provided to the consumer a notice that complies with Lsection 68031 of this

title.

(b) Opt out.

(1) In general. A financial institution may not disclose nonpublic personal

information to a nonaffiliated third party unless -

(A) such financial institution clearly and conspicuously discloses to the

consumer, in writing or in electronic form or other form permitted by

the regulations prescribed under tsection 68041 of this title, that such

information may be disclosed to such third party;

(B) the consumer is given the opportunity, before the time that such

information is initially disclosed, to direct that such information not be

disclosed to such third party; and

(C) the consumer is given an explanation of how the consumer can

exercise that nondisclosure option.

(2) Exception. This subsection shall not prevent a financial institution from

providing nonpublic personal information to a nonaffiliated third party to

perform services for or functions on behalf of the financial institution,

including marketing of the financial institution's own products or services, or

financial products or services offered pursuant to joint agreements between

two or more financial institutions that comply with the requirements

imposed by the regulations prescribed under section 6804 of this title, if the

financial institution fully discloses the providing of such information and

enters into a contractual agreement with the third party that requires the

third party to maintain the confidentiality of such information.

(c) Limits on reuse of information. Except as otherwise provided in this

subchapter, a nonaffiliated third party that receives from a financial institution

nonpublic personal information under this section shall not, directly or through

an affiliate of such receiving third party, disclose such information to any other

person that is a nonaffiliated third party of both the financial institution and

such receiving third party, unless such disclosure would be lawful if made

directly to such other person by the financial institution.

(d) Limitations on the sharing of account number information for marketing

purposes.

A financial institution shall not disclose, other than to a consumer reporting

agency, an account number or similar form of access number or access code for

a credit card account, deposit account, or transaction account of a consumer to

any nonaffiliated third party for use in telemarketing, direct mail marketing, or

other marketing through electronic mail to the consumer.

(e) General exceptions. Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not prohibit

the disclosure of nonpublic personal information -

(1) as necessary to effect, administer, or enforce a transaction requested or

authorized by the consumer, or in connection with

(A) servicing or processing a financial product or service requested or

authorized by the consumer;

(B) maintaining or servicing the consumer's account with the financial

institution, or with another entity as part of a private label credit card

program or other extension of credit on behalf of such entity; or

(C) a proposed or actual securitization, secondary market sale (including

sales of servicing rights), or similar transaction related to a transaction of

the consumer;

(2) with the consent or at the direction of the consumer;

(3)(A) to protect the confidentiality or security of the financial institution's

records pertaining to the consumer, the service or product, or the

transaction therein; (B) to protect against or prevent actual or potential

fraud, unauthorized transactions, claims, or other liability; (C) for required

institutional risk control, or for resolving customer disputes or inquiries; (D)

to persons holding a legal or beneficial interest relating to the consumer; or

(E) to persons acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity on behalf of

the consumer:

(4) to provide information to insurance rate advisory organizations,

guaranty funds or agencies, applicable rating agencies of the financial

institution, persons assessing the institution's compliance with industry

standards, and the institution's attorneys, accountants, and auditors;

(5) to the extent specifically permitted or required under other provisions of

law and in accordance with the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (1 2

U.S.C. 3401 et seq.), to law enforcement agencies (including the Bureau of

Consumer Financial Protection, a Federal functional regulator, the Secretary

of the Treasury with respect to subchapter Il of chapter 53 of title 31, United

States Code, and chapter 2 of title I of Public Law 91-508 (12 U.S.C. 1951-

1 959), a State insurance authority, or the Federal Trade Commission), self-

regulatory organizations, or for an investigation on a matter related to

public safety;

(6)(A) to a consumer reporting agency in accordance with the Fair Credit

Reporting Act El 5 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), or (B) from a consumer report

reported by a consumer reporting agency;

(7) in connection with a proposed or actual sale, merger, transfer, or

exchange of all or a portion of a business or operating unit if the disclosure

of nonpublic personal information concerns solely consumers of such

business or unit; or

(8) to comply with Federal, State, or local laws, rules, and other applicable

legal requirements; to comply with a properly authorized civil, criminal, or

regulatory investigation or subpoena or summons by Federal, State, or local

authorities; or to respond to judicial process or government regulatory

authorities having jurisdiction over the financial institution for examination,

compliance, or other purposes as authorized by law.

GLB Act - Explanation

Explanation of Gramm-Leach-BliIey Act

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Just because information is not a "consumer report" under the FCRA does not

mean that it is free from federal regulation.

The privacy provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, enacted in 1 999, require

financial institutions - such as banks, insurance companies and securities firms -

to protect personally identifiable information about their customers, even

simple identifying information, such as name and address, if the information

can be used to identify the individual as a customer of the financial institution.

These provisions prohibit financial institutions from disclosing this customer

information to non-affiliated third parties, unless the customer has been given

an opportunity to opt out of the disclosure or one of several exceptions applies.

These exceptions are enumerated in the statute and they permit financial

institutions to disclose information to consumer reporting agencies, to prevent

fraud, to fulfill transactions requested by the customer, to respond to court

orders, for regulatory compliance, and for similar purposes. In addition,

companies that receive customer information from a financial institution may

re-disclose the information for one of these same exceptions. The privacy

provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act have been implemented by detailed

rules made by the federal financial regulatory agencies.

What all of this means is that, even if information is not regulated under the

FCRA - for example, name and Social Security number, which, as we saw above,

do not "bear on" creditworthiness - it may still be regulated under the Gramm-

Leach-Bliley Act, if it was initially obtained from a financial institution. As a

result, the disclosure and use of the identifying information maintained by

consumer reporting agencies might not be restricted under the FCRA, but could

be restricted under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, and such information could

only be used or disclosed for one of the exceptions (such as fraud prevention or

regulatory compliance) enumerated in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.

Knowledge Check
Information from financial institutions about their customers that is not regulated as a “consumer report” under the FCRA can be disclosed by the financial institutions without restriction.
FALSE

Module 3: Permissible Purposes

Permissible Purposes

The module "Permissible Purposes" contains the following subsections:

You must access each subsection sequentially. Click on a button below to access each subsection.

Permissible Purposes

Obtaining Consumer Reports

Permissible Purposes

Permissible Purposes

You will learn:

Who can legally obtain a consumer report.

The permissible purposes specified in the FCRA.

Section 604(a) - FCRA Law


FCRA Law: Section 604(a)

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 604(a): Permissible Purposes of Consumer Reports

Section 604(a) In general.-Subject to subsection (c) of this section, any consumer

reporting agency may furnish a consumer report under the following circumstances

and no other:

(1) In response to the order of a court having jurisdiction to issue such an order,

or a subpoena issued in connection with proceedings before a Federal grand

jury.

(2) In accordance with the written instructions of the consumer to whom it

relates.

(3) To a person which it has reason to believe-

(A) intends to use the information in connection with a credit transaction

involving the consumer on whom the information is to be furnished and

involving the extension of credit to, or review or collection of an account of,

the consumer; or

(B) intends to use the information for employment purposes; or

(C) intends to use the information in connection with the underwriting of

insurance involving the consumer; or

(D) intends to use the information in connection with a determination of the

consumer's eligibility for a license or other benefit granted by a

governmental instrumentality required by law to consider an applicant's

financial responsibility or status; or
(E) intends to use the information, as a potential investor or servicer, or

current insurer, in connection with a valuation of, or an assessment of the

credit or prepayment risks associated with, an existing credit obligation; or

(F) otherwise has a legitimate business need for the information

(i) in connection with a business transaction that is initiated by the

consumer; or

(ii) to review an account to determine whether the consumer continues to

meet the terms of the account.

(G) executive departments and agencies in connection with the issuance of

government-sponsored individually-billed travel charge cards.

(4) In response to a request by the head of a State or local child support

enforcement agency (or a State or local government official authorized by the

head of such an agency), if the person making the request certifies to the

consumer reporting agency that-

(A) the consumer report is needed for the purpose of establishing an

individual's capacity to make child support payments or determining the

appropriate level of such payments;

(B) the paternity of the consumer for the child to which the obligation relates

has been established or acknowledged by the consumer in accordance with

State laws under which the obligation arises (if required by those laws);

(C) the person has provided at least 10 days' prior notice to the consumer

whose report is requested, by certified or registered mail to the last known

address of the consumer, that the report will be requested; and

(D) the consumer report will be kept confidential, will be used solely for a

purpose described in subparagraph (A), and will not be used in connection

with any other civil, administrative, or criminal proceeding, or for any other

purpose.

(5) To an agency administering a State plan under section 654 of title 42 for use

to set an initial or modified child support award.

(6) To the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union

Administration as part of its preparation for its appointment or as part of its

exercise of powers, as conservator, receiver, or liquidating agent for an insured

depository institution or insured credit union under the Federal Deposit

Insurance Act L 12 U.S.C. 181 1 et seq.) or the Federal Credit Union Act t 12 U.S.C.

1 751 et seq.l, or other applicable Federal or State law, or in connection with the

resolution or liquidation of a failed or failing insured

insured credit union, as applicable.

depository institution or

INTERVENING TEXT - Section 604(b) is dealt with under employment; Sections 604(c)

and (e) are dealt with under prescreening; Section 604(f) is dealt with under

certifications; Section 604(g) is dealt with under medical information.


Section 604(a) - Explanation




Explanation of Permissible Purposes

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 604(a) protects the privacy of information in consumer reports by limiting the

circumstances under which a consumer reporting agency can provide a consumer

report. A consumer reporting agency may provide a consumer report only for one of

the so-called "permissible purposes" described in Section 604.

While the permissible purposes cover a great many circumstances, you will see that

there are several critical uses of consumer reports for which there is no specific

permissible purpose. For example, there is no permissible purpose enabling users

to obtain consumer reports for commercial transactions, for marketing purposes, or

for law enforcement. As explained below, however, even where there is no

permissible purpose, a consumer reporting agency may provide a consumer report if

the consumer provides written authorization.

Although a consumer reporting agency may not provide you with a report if one or

more of these circumstances is not present, even where you have a permissible

purpose a consumer reporting agency is not required to furnish a consumer report -

that is, a consumer reporting agency can always decline to provide a report to an

end-user. In addition, a consumer reporting agency may impose additional

restrictions on its users - for example, it may require a specific type of written

authorization, or it may prohibit certain types of uses. For this reason, it is always

important to review your user agreement with your consumer reporting agency to

ensure that you are requesting consumer reports in compliance with the contractual

requirements.

Section 604(a)(1) - Court Having Jurisdiction

A consumer reporting agency may provide a consumer report to a user in response

to an order issued by a court having proper authority. Specifically, a consumer report

may be issued only "in response to the order of a court having jurisdiction to issue

such an order." This means that an administrative subpoena issued by an agency

does not qualify as a court order, nor does a request from law enforcement.

Section 604(a)(2) - Written Instructions of the Consumer

A consumer reporting agency may provide a consumer report to a user in

accordance with the "written instructions" of the consumer. That is, even if no other

permissible purpose is available, a consumer reporting agency may issue a

consumer report when the consumer has authorized, in writing, the consumer

reporting agency to issue the report. Generally, however, if you have one of the

other permissible purposes outlined below, you do not need the consumer's

permission to obtain a consumer report about the consumer from a consumer

reporting agency. (Note that you must obtain consent when obtaining a consumer

report tor employment purposes. In addition, some states may require permission

before you can obtain a consumer report. For example, Vermont requires that a

consumer consent before his or her report can be obtained, and New York requires

that you notify a consumer before you obtain his or her report.)

Section 604(a)(3)(A) - Extension of Credit or Review or Collection of Account

You have a permissible purpose to obtain a consumer report on a consumer in

connection with a credit transaction "involving the consumer," such as:

(2)

(3)

(4)

when a consumer has applied to you for credit;

when a consumer has agreed to be contractually obligated on a credit

transaction (such as a cosigner or guarantor);

when you will use the information to review an existing account; and

when you will use the information to collect on a credit account.

In addition, as discussed below, when a credit transaction is not initiated by a

consumer, you have limited rights to obtain credit report information to "prescreen"

the consumer for a firm offer of credit.

Section 604(a)(3)(B)- For Employment Purposes

Reports may be furnished for "employment purposes." The term "employment

purposes" when used in connection with a consumer report means a report used for

the purpose of evaluating a consumer for employment, promotion, reassignment or

retention as an employee. The term "employment purposes" has generally been

interpreted broadly, to permit you to obtain a consumer report on a prospective as

well as a current employee. In addition, courts and regulators have opined that you

can obtain consumer reports to evaluate temporary employees or even

independent contractors.

This general permissible purpose must be read in connection with the conditions in

FCRA Section 604(b) for using consumer reports for employment purposes. To

summarize, when you obtain a report for employment purposes, you are required to

provide special certifications to the consumer reporting agency from which you

obtain the report, and are required to provide special notices to the individual whom

you are evaluating for employment. The conditions on the use of a consumer report

for employment purposes are discussed in greater detail below.

Section 604(a)(3)(C) - Underwriting of Insurance

Consumer reports may be obtained for the purpose of underwriting insurance

"involving" the consumer. An insurer may obtain a consumer report to decide

whether or not to issue a policy on a consumer or for any other underwriting or

rating decision involving a policy (such as the amount and terms of coverage, the

duration, rates, renewal or cancellation).

For the permissible purpose of using consumer reports in insurance transactions not

initiated by the consumer (i.e., prescreened transactions), see FCRA section 604(c),

discussed below.

Section 604(a)(3)(D), (E), and (F) - Other Purposes

Section 604(a)(3)(D) - Government agencies are sometimes required to investigate

the financial status of an individual before granting a license or other benefit. For

example, some public assistance programs require that individuals obtaining

assistance meet certain standards for financial need. In those instances, a consumer

report can be a vital part of the investigation to learn whether an applicant's

personal finances are in an appropriate financial condition for the benefit sought.

Section 604(a)(3)(E) - This section creates a permissible purpose for potential

investors or servicers or current insurers of credit obligations to obtain consumer

reports for the purpose of evaluating or assessing the credit or prepayment risks

involved in existing credit obligations of consumers. For example, an entity that

plans to invest in a mortgage loan transaction would have a permissible purpose

under this section to obtain a consumer report on the borrower in that transaction.

Section 604(a)(3)(F) - The catch-all phrase which concludes the list of permissible

purposes is "legitimate business need for the information." However, the "legitimate

business need" purpose applies only if the consumer initiates the transaction or if

the consumer has an account and the entity that holds that account will use the

consumer report to review the account to determine if the consumer continues to

meet the terms of the account.

A consumer's application to rent an apartment, lease a car, or open a checking or

savings account all constitute transactions providing a user with a permissible

purpose. Although this permissible purpose refers to a "legitimate business need ..

in connection with a business transaction that is initiated by the consumer"

(emphasis added), courts and regulators generally have opined that this means a

consumer transaction (i.e., for personal, family or household purposes), and not a

commercial transaction. For this reason, when an individual applies for credit, opens

an account, or leases property for his or her business, a consumer reporting agency

may require that the individual co-sign or guarantee the obligation, or may require

the individual's "written instructions" before providing a consumer report.

Business credit reports, such as those provided by Dun & Bradstreet, are not

"consumer reports" and are not regulated by the FCRA. These business credit

reports may therefore be obtained in a commercial transaction without the business

owner's "written instructions."

Knowledge Check
Consumer reporting agencies can provide consumer reports to law enforcement without a subpoena.
FALSE
Obtaining Consumer Reports

Obtaining Consumer Reports

May only provide consumer reports with a permissible purpose

The FCRA imposes criminal penalties against people who obtain consumer

reports under false pretenses.

Section 604(f), 607(a), 619 - FCRA Law


FCRA Law: Section 6040, 6076), 619

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 604(f): Certain use or obtaining of information prohibited

(f) Certain use or obtaining of information prohibited

A person shall not use or obtain a consumer report for any purpose unless-

(1 ) the consumer report is obtained for a purpose for which the consumer report

is authorized to be furnished under this section; and

(2) the purpose is certified in accordance with section 607 Lof this title) by a

prospective user of the report through a general or specific certification.

Section 607(a): Identity and purposes of credit users

(a) Identity and purposes of credit users. Every consumer reporting agency shall

maintain reasonable procedures designed to avoid violations of LFCRA S 6051 and to

limit the furnishing of consumer reports to the purposes listed under LFCRA 5 6041.

These procedures shall require that prospective users of the information identify

themselves, certify the purposes for which the information is sought, and certify that

the information will be used for no other purpose. Every consumer reporting agency

shall make a reasonable effort to verify the identity of a new prospective user and

the uses certified by such prospective user prior to furnishing such user a consumer

report. No consumer reporting agency may furnish a consumer report to any person

if it has reasonable grounds for believing that the consumer report will not be used

for a purpose listed in LFCRA S 6041.

Section 619: Obtaining information under false pretenses

Any person who knowingly and willfully obtains information on a consumer from a

consumer reporting agency under false pretenses shall be fined under title 1 8,

imprisoned for not more than 2 years, or both.

Section 604(f), 607(a), 619 - Explanation

Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 604(f), 607(a), 619

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

These provisions all work together to ensure that users of consumer reports have

permissible purposes to obtain consumer reports and that they use the reports that

they obtain only for permissible purposes.

The first provision, section 604(f), is a book-end to section 604(a), discussed above.

Section 604(a) prohibits consumer reporting agencies from providing consumer

reports for anything but permissible purposes and section 604(f) prohibits any

"person" (defined to include an individual or a company) from obtaining or using a

consumer report for anything but permissible purposes.

In addition, section 604(f) incorporates by reference section 607(a) which requires

consumer reporting agencies to obtain a "certification" from each consumer report

user of "the purposes for which the information is sought, and ... that the

information will be used for no other purpose." Consumer reporting agencies are

specifically permitted by section 604(f) to obtain "general" certifications from users

that cover a number of transactions - i.e., consumer reporting agencies are not

required to obtain a specific certification each time that a user obtains a consumer

report. These general certifications are frequently obtained as a part of the master

services agreement between the consumer reporting agency and the user - for

example, the user might be required to certify each purpose for which the user plans

to obtain consumer reports (e.g., credit, insurance, employment, written

instructions), and then to certify that the information will be used for "no other

purpose.'

Finally, you are not permitted to obtain consumer reports under false pretenses.

This is an extremely important provision of the FCRA and the only one which

carries possible criminal penalties for users, including jail time. It is particularly

important that you educate your loan officers, underwriters or other employees with

access to consumer reports with respect to this provision. They should never obtain

consumer reports on individuals without a permissible purpose - not friends,

neighbors, celebrities or even themselves. You also should supervise your

employees for adherence to this requirement and should discipline them when you

discover non-compliance. The "false pretenses" provision is frequently incorporated

into consumer reporting agency user agreements, and consumer reporting agencies

sometimes even require that you post a notice of the criminal penalties on every

terminal from which consumer reports can be accessed.

Consumer reporting agencies frequently audit users to ensure that they are only

obtaining reports for permissible purposes. If a consumer reporting agency

discovers that you are obtaining reports without a permissible purpose, the agency

might suspend or terminate your access to consumer reports.

Knowledge Check
Companies are required to certify to consumer reporting agencies the purpose for which they are obtaining a consumer report.
TRUE

Module 4: Prescreening

Prescreening

Companies generally cannot obtain a consumer report for marketing.

They obtain a "prescreened" list of consumers to make "firm offers" of

credit or insurance.

Section 603(I) - FCRA Law
Firm offer of credit or insurance

FCRA Law: Prescreening

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(/): Firm offer of credit or insurance.

The term "firm offer of credit or insurance" means any offer of credit or insurance to

a consumer that will be honored if the consumer is determined, based on

information in a consumer report on the consumer, to meet the specific criteria used

to select the consumer for the offer, except that the offer may be further

conditioned on one or more of the following:

(1 ) The consumer being determined, based on information in the consumer's

application for the credit or insurance, to meet specific criteria bearing on credit

worthiness or insurability, as applicable, that are established--

(A) before selection of the consumer for the offer; and

(B) for the purpose of determining whether to extend credit or insurance

pursuant to the offer.

(2) Verification

(A) that the consumer continues to meet the specific criteria used to select

the consumer for the offer, by using information in a consumer report on the

consumer, information in the consumer's application for the credit or

insurance, or other information bearing on the credit worthiness or

insurability of the consumer; or

(B) of the information in the consumer's application for the credit or

insurance, to determine that the consumer meets the specific criteria bearing

on credit worthiness or insurability.

(3) The consumer furnishing any collateral that is a requirement for the extension

of the credit or insurance that was--

(A) established before selection of the consumer for the offer of credit or

insurance; and
(B) disclosed to the consumer in the offer of credit or insurance.


Section 604 - FCRA Law
Permissible purposes of consumer reports

FCRA Law: Prescreening

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 604: Permissible purposes of consumer reports

(c) Furnishing reports in connection with credit or insurance transactions that are not

initiated by the consumer

(1) In general. A consumer reporting agency may furnish a consumer report

relating to any consumer pursuant to subparagraph (A) or (C) of subsection (a)(3)

of this section in connection with any credit or insurance transaction that is not

initiated by the consumer only if-

(A) the consumer authorizes the agency to provide such report to such

person;

or

(i) the transaction consists of a firm offer of credit or insurance;

(B)

(ii) the consumer reporting agency has complied with subsection (e) of

this section;

(iii) there is not in effect an election by the consumer, made in accordance

with subsection (e) of this section, to have the consumer's name and


address excluded from lists of names provided by the agency pursuant to

this paragraph; and

(iv) the consumer report does not contain a date of birth that shows that

the consumer has not attained the age of 21, or, if the date of birth on

the consumer report shows that the consumer has not attained the age

of 21 , such consumer consents to the consumer reporting agency to such

furnishing.

(2) Limits on information received under paragraph (1 )(B). A person may receive

pursuant to paragraph (1 )(B) only--

(A) the name and address of a consumer;

(B) an identifier that is not unique to the consumer and that is used by the

person solely for the purpose of verifying the identity of the consumer; and

(C) other information pertaining to a consumer that does not identify the

relationship or experience of the consumer with respect to a particular

creditor or other entity.

(3) Information regarding inquiries. Except as provided in LFCRA S of

this title), a consumer reporting agency shall not furnish to any person a record

of inquiries in connection with a credit or insurance transaction that is not

initiated by a consumer.

(d) Reserved

(e) Election of consumer to be excluded from lists

(1) In general. A consumer may elect to have the consumer's name and address

excluded from any list provided by a consumer reporting agency under

subsection (c)(l )(B) of this section in connection with a credit or insurance

transaction that is not initiated by the consumer, by notifying the agency in

accordance with paragraph (2) that the consumer does not consent to any use of

a consumer report relating to the consumer in connection with any credit or

insurance transaction that is not initiated by the consumer.

(2) Manner of notification. A consumer shall notify a consumer reporting agency

under paragraph (1 )--

(A) through the notification system maintained by the agency under

paragraph (5); or

(B) by submitting to the agency a signed notice of election form issued by the

agency for purposes of this subparagraph.

(3) Response of agency after notification through system. Upon receipt of

notification of the election of a consumer under paragraph (1 ) through the

notification system maintained by the agency under paragraph (5), a consumer

reporting agency shall--

(A) inform the consumer that the election is effective only for the 5-year

period following the election if the consumer does not submit to the agency a

signed notice of election form issued by the agency for purposes of

paragraph (2)(B); and

(B) provide to the consumer a notice of election form, if requested by the

consumer, not later than 5 business days after receipt of the notification of

the election through the system established under paragraph (5), in the case

of a request made at the time the consumer provides notification through

the system.

(4) Effectiveness of election. An election of a consumer under paragraph (1) -

(A) shall be effective with respect to a consumer reporting agency beginning 5

business days after the date on which the consumer notifies the agency in

accordance with paragraph (2);

(B) shall be effective with respect to a consumer reporting agency--

(i) subject to subparagraph (C), during the 5-year period beginning 5

business days after the date on which the consumer notifies the agency

of the election, in the case of an election for which a consumer notifies

the agency only in accordance with paragraph (2)(A); or

(ii) until the consumer notifies the agency under subparagraph (C), in the

case of an election for which a consumer notifies the agency in

accordance with paragraph (2)(B);

(C) shall not be effective after the date on which the consumer notifies the

agency, through the notification system established by the agency under

paragraph (5), that the election is no longer effective; and

(D) shall be effective with respect to each affiliate of the agency.

(5) Notification system

(A) In general. Each consumer reporting agency that, under subsection (c)(l)

(B) of this section, furnishes a consumer report in connection with a credit or

insurance transaction that is not initiated by a consumer, shall--

(i) establish and maintain a notification system, including a toll-free

telephone number, which permits any consumer whose consumer report

is maintained by the agency to notify the agency, with appropriate

identification, of the consumer's election to have the consumer's name

and address excluded from any such list of names and addresses

provided by the agency for such a transaction; and

(ii) publish by not later than 365 days after September 30, 1 996, and not

less than annually thereafter, in a publication of general circulation in the

area served by the agency--

(l) a notification that information in consumer files maintained by the

agency may be used in connection with such transactions; and

(Il) the address and toll-free telephone number for consumers to use

to notify the agency of the consumer's election under clause (i).

(B) Establishment and maintenance as compliance. Establishment and

maintenance of a notification system (including a toll-free telephone number)

and publication by a consumer reporting agency on the agency's own behalf

and on behalf of any of its affiliates in accordance with this paragraph is

deemed to be compliance with this paragraph by each of those affiliates.

(6) Notification system by agencies that operate nationwide. Each consumer

reporting agency that compiles and maintains files on consumers on a

nationwide basis shall establish and maintain a notification system for purposes

of paragraph (5) jointly with other such consumer reporting agencies.

Section 615(d) - FCRA Law
Duties of users making written credit or insurance solicitations on the basis of information contained in consumer files




FCRA Law: Prescreening

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 615(d): Duties of users making written credit or insurance solicitations

on the basis of information contained in consumer files

(1 ) In general.--Any person who uses a consumer report on any consumer in

connection with any credit or insurance transaction that is not initiated by the

consumer, that is provided to that person under LFCRA S 604(c)(1 shall

provide with each written solicitation made to the consumer regarding the

transaction a clear and conspicuous statement that--

(A) information contained in the consumer's consumer report was used in

connection with the transaction;

(B) the consumer received the offer of credit or insurance because the

consumer satisfied the criteria for credit worthiness or insurability under

which the consumer was selected for the offer;

(C) if applicable, the credit or insurance may not be extended if, after the

consumer responds to the offer, the consumer does not meet the criteria

used to select the consumer for the offer or any applicable criteria bearing on

credit worthiness or insurability or does not furnish any required collateral;

(D) the consumer has a right to prohibit information contained in the

consumer's file with any consumer reporting agency from being used in

connection with any credit or insurance transaction that is not initiated by

the consumer; and

(E) the consumer may exercise the right referred to in subparagraph (D) by

notifying a notification system established under LFCRA S 604(eJ.

(2) Disclosure of address and telephone number; format. A statement under

paragraph (1 ) shall--

(A) include the address and toll-free telephone number of the appropriate

notification system established under LFCRA S and

(B) be presented in such format and in such type size and manner as to be

simple and easy to understand, as established by the Consumer Financial

Protection Bureau), by rule, in consultation with the Federal Trade

Commission and the National Credit Union Administration.

(3) Maintaining criteria on file. A person who makes an offer of credit or

insurance to a consumer under a credit or insurance transaction described in

paragraph (1 ) shall maintain on file the criteria used to select the consumer to

receive the offer, all criteria bearing on credit worthiness or insurability, as

applicable, that are the basis for determining whether or not to extend credit or

insurance pursuant to the offer, and any requirement for the furnishing of

collateral as a condition of the extension of credit or insurance, until the

expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the date on which the offer is made

to the consumer.

(4) Authority of Federal agencies regarding unfair or deceptive acts or practices

not affected. This section is not intended to affect the authority of any Federal or

State agency to enforce a prohibition against unfair or deceptive acts or

practices, including the making of false or misleading statements in connection

with a credit or insurance transaction that is not initiated by the consumer.

12 C.F.R. Part 1022, Subpart F-Prescreen Opt-Out Notice
Section 1022.54: Duties of users making written firm offers of credit or insurance based on information contained in consumer files

FCRA Law: Prescreening

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

12 C.F.R. Part 1022, Subpart F-Prescreen Opt-Out Notice

Section 1022.54: Duties of users making written firm offers of credit or

insurance based on information contained in consumer files

(a) Scope. This subpart applies to any person who uses a consumer report on any

consumer in connection with any credit or insurance transaction that is not initiated

by the consumer, and that is provided to that person under section 604(c)(1 )(B) of

the FCRA (1 5 U.S.C. 1681 b(c)(l )(B)), except for a person excluded from coverage of

this part by section 1029 of the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 201 0, Title X of

the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Public Law 1 11-

203, 124 Stat. 137.

(b) Definitions.

For purposes of this section and Appendix D of this part, the following definitions

apply:

(1) Simple and easy to understand means:

(i) A layered format as described in paragraph (c) of this section;

(ii) Plain language designed to be understood by ordinary consumers; and

(iii) Use of clear and concise sentences, paragraphs, and sections.

(iv) Examples. For purposes of this part, examples of factors to be considered

in determining whether a statement is in plain language and uses clear and

concise sentences, paragraphs, and sections include:

(A) Use of short explanatory sentences;

(B) Use of definite, concrete, everyday words;

(C) Use of active voice;

(D) Avoidance of multiple negatives;

(E) Avoidance of legal and technical business terminology

(F) Avoidance of explanations that are imprecise and reasonably subject

to different interpretations; and

(G) Use of language that is not misleading.

(2) Principal promotional document means the document designed to be seen first

by the consumer, such as the cover letter.

(c) Prescreen opt-out notice.

Any person who uses a consumer report on any consumer in connection with any

credit or insurance transaction that is not initiated by the consumer, and that is

provided to that person under section 604(c)(1 )(B) of the FCRA (1 5 U.S.C. 1 681 b(c)(l )

(B)), shall, with each written solicitation made to the consumer about the

transaction, provide the consumer with the following statement, consisting of a short

portion and a long portion, which shall be in the same language as the offer of credit

or insurance:

(1) Short notice. The short notice shall be a clear and conspicuous, and simple and

easy to understand statement as follows:

(i) Content. The short notice shall state that the consumer has the right to opt

out of receiving prescreened solicitations, and shall provide the toll-free

number the consumer can call to exercise that right. The short notice also

shall direct the consumer to the existence and location of the long notice,

and shall state the heading for the long notice. The short notice shall not

contain any other information.

(ii) Form. The short notice shall be:

(A) In a type size that is larger than the type size of the principal text on

the same page, but in no event smaller than 12 point type, or if provided

by electronic means, then reasonable steps shall be taken to ensure that

the type size is larger than the type size of the principal text on the same

page;

(B) On the front side of the first page of the principal promotional

document in the solicitation, or, if provided electronically, on the same

page and in close proximity to the principal marketing message;

(C) Located on the page and in a format so that the statement is distinct

from other text, such as inside a border; and

(D) In a type style that is distinct from the principal type style used on the

same page, such as bolded, italicized, underlined, and/or in a color that

contrasts with the color of the principal text on the page, if the solicitation

is in more than one color.

(2) Long notice. The long notice shall be a clear and conspicuous, and simple and

easy to understand statement as follows:

(i) Content. The long notice shall state the information required by section

61 5(d) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (1 5 U.S.C. 1681 m(d)). The long notice

shall not include any other information that interferes with, detracts from,

contradicts, or otherwise undermines the purpose of the notice.

(ii) Form. The long notice shall:

(A) Appear in the solicitation;

(B) Be in a type size that is no smaller than the type size of the principal

text on the same page, and, for solicitations provided other than by

electronic means, the type size shall in no event be smaller than 8 point

type;

(C) Begin with a heading in capital letters and underlined, and identifying

the long notice as the "PRESCREEN & OPT-OUT NOTICE;"

(D) Be in a type style that is distinct from the principal type style used on

the same page, such as bolded, italicized, underlined, and/or in a color

that contrasts with the color of the principal text on the page, if the

solicitation is in more than one color; and

(E) Be set apart from other text on the page, such as by including a blank

line above and below the statement, and by indenting both the left and

right margins from other text on the page.

12 C.F.R. Part 1022.12, Record retention

FCRA Law: Prescreening

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

12 C.F.R. S 1002.12 Record retention.

(b) Preservation of records -

(7) Prescreened solicitations. For 25 months after the date on which an offer of

credit is made to potential customers ...,

the creditor shall retain in original form

or a copy thereof:

(i) The text of any prescreened solicitation;

(ii) The list of criteria the creditor used to select potential recipients of the

solicitation; and

(iii) Any correspondence related to complaints (formal or informal) about the

solicitation.

Explanation of Prescreening

Explanation of Prescreening

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

As a general matter, you cannot obtain a consumer report unless the consumer

initiates one of the transactions for which there is a permissible purpose (such as,

credit, insurance, employment, apartment rental or opening a deposit account) or

provides you with his or her authorization to obtain his or her consumer report. This

means that you generally cannot obtain a consumer report for unsolicited

marketing.

The one exception to this rule is "prescreening." When you commit to making a

"firm offer" of credit or insurance to every consumer who meets certain

creditworthiness or insurability criteria that you establish in advance, you may

obtain certain limited information about the consumer so that you can target your

offer to those consumers who are most likely to qualify. Prescreening is only

available to creditors and insurers - you cannot obtain a prescreened list of

consumers to market other products or services.

The term "firm offer" is carefully defined in FCRA section 603(1). It means "any offer

of credit or insurance ... that will be honored if the consumer is determined, based

on information in a consumer report on the consumer, to meet the specific criteria

used to select the consumer for the offer." To make a "firm offer" you must first

determine the criteria by which you will evaluate consumers who apply for the offer.

You must commit to honoring the offer for all consumers to whom you make the

offer and who apply and who meet the criteria that you establish. You may then

obtain a list of consumers meeting those criteria from a consumer reporting agency,

so that you can target your offer only to those consumers who are likely to meet

your pre-established criteria. To illustrate, let's say that you would like to acquire

more credit card customers, but you only are looking for individuals with credit

scores better than 720. You can obtain a list of consumers whose credit scores are

better than 720 from a consumer reporting agency, if you commit to making to each

consumer on the list a firm offer of credit.

The consumer reporting agency is limited in the amount of information that it can

provide to you - for example, it cannot provide information about a consumer's

experience with a specific creditor. (This restriction prevents you from screening for

your competitor's best customers.) The consumer reporting agency also cannot

provide you with the name of any consumer that it knows to be under the age of 21,

and is required to maintain an "opt-out" system that consumers can call if they want

to be excluded from prescreened lists. Some consumers may not want to receive

solicitations for "firm offers" of credit and insurance, and these consumers can limit

these offers by using the opt-out system established by the consumer reporting

agency, and the consumer reporting agency thereafter is prohibited from providing

the consumer's name to you on a prescreened list.

The "nationwide" consumer

reporting agencies - such as, Equifax, Experian, or Trans Union - are required to

establish a single toll-free telephone number that consumers can use to opt out with

all of the nationwide agencies.

You are obligated to include the telephone number and address of the consumer

reporting agency's opt-out notification system on every solicitation for a firm offer of

credit or insurance that you send to consumers. You also are required to notify

consumers of certain additional information, including that the consumer was

selected for the offer based on information in his or her consumer report. The

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ("CFPB") has made a rule which prescribes a

model format for the notice to be included with prescreened solicitations. See 12

C.F.R 5 1 022.54(c) and Appendix D to Part 1022--Model Forms for Firm Offers of

Credit or Insurance. The CFPB notice is in two parts: the first part is required to

include the opt-out telephone number, to be placed on the front of a prescreened

letter and to be set off by a box; the second part can be placed elsewhere in the

solicitation and includes the additional statutorily required information.

You are required to keep for three years records of the criteria used to select

consumers to receive firm offers, all criteria bearing on credit worthiness or

insurability, as applicable, that are the basis for determining whether or not to

extend credit or insurance pursuant to the offer, and any requirement for the

furnishing of collateral as a condition of the extension of credit or insurance. FCRA S

61 5(d)(3). When making a firm offer of credit, you are required to keep for 25

months the text of any prescreened solicitation; the list of criteria that you used to

select recipients of the firm offer of credit; and any correspondence related to

complaints about the solicitation. 12 C.F.R. S 1002.12.


Knowledge Check
Which of the following are prescreening requirements under the FCRA?
The consumer reporting agency must remove the consumer’s name from the prescreened list within five business days after notification by the consumer.
The consumer can opt out of prescreened lists for three years
The consumer must notify every nationwide consumer reporting agency about their intention to opt out.
The consumer can only opt out by mail.
All the above.
Selected c. But it was wrong

Incorrect

You did not select the correct response. The correct response is :

"The consumer reporting agency must remove the consumer's name from

prescreened lists within five business days after notification by the

consumer."
Module 5: Adverse Action
Adverse Action Based on Credit Report
Risk-Based Pricing Notice
Adverse Action Based on Information Other than a Credit Report


Adverse Action

The module "Adverse Action " contains the following subsections:

You must access each subsection sequentially. Click on a button below to access each subsection.

Adverse Action Based on Credit Report


Adverse Action Based on Credit Report

Adverse Action

Section 61 5(a):

Outlines what information users of consumer reports must provide to

consumers in the event of an adverse action.

Allows the consumer to obtain a free copy of the consumer report and

dispute any information in the report.


FCRA Law: Sections 615(a), 609(f), and 603(k)
ECOA Rule: Section 1002.2(c)

Section 615(a) - FCRA Law
Duties of users taking adverse actions on basis of information contained in consumer reports

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 615(a): Duties of users taking adverse actions on basis of information

contained in consumer reports

(a) Duties of users taking adverse actions on basis of information contained in

consumer reports.

If any person takes any adverse action with respect to any consumer that is based in

whole or in part on any information contained in a consumer report, the person

shall

(1 ) provide oral, written, or electronic notice of the adverse action to the

consumer;

(2) provide to the consumer written or electronic disclosure

(A) of a numerical credit score as defined in section 609(f)(2)(A) used by such

person in taking any adverse action based in whole or in part on any

information in a consumer report; and

(B) of the information set forth in subparagraphs (B) through (E) of section

(3) provide to the consumer orally, in writing, or electronically

(A) the name, address, and telephone number of the consumer reporting

agency (including a toll-free telephone number established by the agency if

the agency compiles and maintains files on consumers on a nationwide

basis) that furnished the report to the person; and

(B) a statement that the consumer reporting agency did not make the

decision to take the adverse action and is unable to provide the consumer

the specific reasons why the adverse action was taken; and

(4) provide to the consumer an oral, written, or electronic notice of the

consumer's right
(A) to obtain, under section 61 2, a free copy of a consumer report on the

consumer from the consumer reporting agency referred to in paragraph (2),

which notice shall include an indication of the 60-day period under that

section for obtaining such a copy; and

(B) to dispute, under section 61 1, with a consumer reporting agency the

accuracy or completeness of any information in a consumer report furnished

by the agency.

Section 609(f) - FCRA Law
Disclosure of Credit Scores

“Text Omitted”

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 609(f): Disclosure of Credit Scores

(f) Disclosure of Credit Scores

(1) In general. Upon the request of a consumer for a credit score, a consumer

reporting agency shall supply to the consumer a statement indicating that the

information and credit scoring model may be different than the credit score that

may be used by the lender, and a notice which shall include -

(A) the current credit score of the consumer or the most recent credit score of

the consumer that was previously calculated by the credit reporting agency

for a purpose related to the extension of credit;

(B) the range of possible credit scores under the model used;

(C) all of the key factors that adversely affected the credit score of the

consumer in the model used, the total number of which shall not exceed 4,

subject to paragraph (9);

(D) the date on which the credit score was created; and

(E) the name of the person or entity that provided the credit score or credit

file upon which the credit score was created.

(2) Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall

apply:

(A) The term "credit score"

(i) means a numerical value or a categorization derived from a statistical

tool or modeling system used by a person who makes or arranges a loan

to predict the likelihood of certain credit behaviors, including default (and

the numerical value or the categorization derived from such analysis may

also be referred to as a "risk predictor" or "risk score"); and


(ii) does not include

(l) any mortgage score or rating of an automated underwriting system

that considers one or more factors in addition to credit information,

including the loan to value ratio, the amount of down payment, or the

financial assets of a consumer; or

(Il) any other elements of the underwriting process or underwriting

decision.

(B) The term "key factors" means all relevant elements or reasons adversely

affecting the credit score for the particular individual, listed in the order of

their importance based on their effect on the credit score.

* * * Text Ornitted* * *

(9) Use of enquiries as a key factor. If a key factor that adversely affects the credit

score of a consumer consists of the number of enquiries made with respect to a

consumer report, that factor shall be included in the disclosure pursuant to

paragraph (1 )(C) without regard to the numerical limitation in such paragraph.

Section 603(k) - FCRA Law
FCRA Definition of Adverse Action

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(k): FCRA Definition of Adverse Action

(k) Adverse Action.

(1) Actions included. The term "adverse action"

(A) has the same meaning as in section Ll 691 (d)(6) of this title); and

(B) means

(i) a denial or cancellation of, an increase in any charge for, or a reduction

or other adverse or unfavorable change in the terms of coverage or

amount of, any insurance, existing or applied for, in connection with the

underwriting of insurance;

(ii) a denial of employment or any other decision for employment

purposes that adversely affects any current or prospective employee;

(iii) a denial or cancellation of, an increase in any charge for, or any other

adverse or unfavorable change in the terms of, any license or benefit

described in LFCRA S and

(iv) an action taken or determination that is-

(l) made in connection with an application that was made by, or a

transaction that was initiated by, any consumer, or in connection with

a review of an account under LFCRA S and

(Il) adverse to the interests of the consumer.

(2) Applicable findings, decisions, commentary, and orders.- For purposes of any

determination of whether an action is an adverse action under paragraph (1 )(A),

all appropriate final findings, decisions, commentary, and orders issued under

section Ll 691 (d)(6) of this title) by the LConsumer Financial Protection Bureau) or

any court shall apply.

Section 1002.2(c) - ECOA Law
ECOA Definition of Adverse Action

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 1002.2(c): ECOA Definition of Adverse Action

(c) Adverse action.

(1) The term means:

(i) A refusal to grant credit in substantially the amount or on substantially the

terms requested in an application unless the creditor makes a counteroffer

(to grant credit in a different amount or on other terms) and the applicant

uses or expressly accepts the credit offered;

(ii) A termination of an account or an unfavorable change in the terms of an

account that does not affect all or substantially all of a class of the creditor's

accounts; or

(iii) A refusal to increase the amount of credit available to an applicant who

has made an application for an increase.

(2) The term does not include:

(i) A change in the terms of an account expressly agreed to by an applicant.

(ii) Any action or forbearance relating to an account taken in connection with

inactivity, default, or delinquency as to that account;

(iii) A refusal or failure to authorize an account transaction at point of sale or

loan, except when the refusal is a termination or an unfavorable change in

the terms of an account that does not affect all or substantially all of a class

of the creditor's accounts, or when the refusal is a denial of an application for

an increase in the amount of credit available under the account;

(iv) A refusal to extend credit because applicable law prohibits the creditor

from extending the credit requested; or

(v) A refusal to extend credit because the creditor does not offer the type of

credit or credit plan requested.

(3) An action that falls within the definition of both paragraphs (c)(l ) and (c)(2) of

this section is governed by paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
Explanation of Adverse Action Laws (FCRA & ECOA)


Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 615(a) - Duties of users of consumer reports taking adverse action

Whenever a person takes adverse action against a consumer based in whole or in

part on information in a consumer report, the person must notify the consumer of

the adverse action.

Congress added the notice requirement to inform a consumer when an action has

been taken that might be contrary to the consumer's interests, based on information

from a consumer reporting agency. This will alert the consumer to the fact that the

person taking the action used a consumer report, identi

fy the agency involved, notify


the consumer of his or her right to get a free copy of their file and of his or her right

to dispute anything in the file. More recently, Congress amended the law to require

that any credit score used to take adverse action also must be disclosed to the

consumer, along with information explaining the score.

Definition of Adverse Action

What constitutes an "adverse action" depends on the context in which the consumer

report was obtained and used.

For example, in a credit transaction, the definition of "adverse action" is the same as

it is under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act ("ECOA") and Regulation B. Similar to

the FCRA, the ECOA requires a lender to provide a notice to a consumer when the

lender takes "adverse action" against the consumer - although the ECOA requires a

notice even where the lender did not use a consumer report to take adverse action.

The ECOA definition of "adverse action" generally requires a lender to provide an

adverse action notice when it refuses to grant credit to an applicant on the terms

requested in an application (unless the lender makes a counter-offer of credit to the

applicant and the applicant accepts the counter-offer). Congress made the

definitions of "adverse action" the same under ECOA and FCRA to ease compliance

for lenders, so that lenders, who are required to provide notices to applicants under

both statutes, could provide both notices at the same time and under the same

circumstances. In fact, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has prescribed a

single model notice that can be used to satisfy a lender's adverse action notification

duties under both ECOA and FCRA.

In an insurance transaction, the term "adverse action" means a denial or

cancellation of insurance, an increase in any charge for insurance, or a reduction or

other adverse or unfavorable change in the terms of coverage or amount of any

insurance. The U.S. Supreme Court considered this definition, and determined that

it applies to new insurance policies, as well as renewals of existing policies (even

though there cannot technically be an "increase" in price or a "change" in coverage

with respect to a new policy). See Safeco v. Burr, 551 U.S. 47 (2007). The Supreme

Court held that an insurer is required to send a notice when an insurance applicant

or policyholder is charged more than he or she would have been charged if the

insurer had not used consumer report information to underwrite the insurance.

Employers and prospective employers take "adverse action" when they decline to

hire an applicant, fire an existing employee, or make any other employment decision

that adversely affects any current or prospective employee. (As explained in greater

detail below, employers also must provide employees and job applicants with a

special notice before they take adverse action.)

Other users of consumer reports, such as a landlord, a merchant cashing a check, or

a bank opening a deposit account, take "adverse action" when they take an action or

make a determination that is "adverse to the interests of the consumer," such as

declining the check or refusing to rent an apartment to the individual.

Content of Adverse Action Notice

In addition to telling the consumer that the adverse action was based on information

in a consumer report, the notice must include the name, address and telephone

number of the consumer reoorting agencv making the reoort. If the consumer

reporting agency operates on a nationwide basis - such as Equifax, Experian and

TransUnion - the notice must include the consumer reporting agency's toll-free

telephone number.

The notice must explain that the consumer reporting agency did not make the

decision to take the adverse action and cannot give the consumer the specific

reasons why the adverse action was taken.

The adverse action notice must also tell the consumer about two important rights

under the FCRA:

(1 ) the right to obtain within 60 days a free copy of a consumer report about the

consumer from the consumer reporting agency identified in the notice, and

(2) the right to dispute the accuracy or completeness of any information in a

consumer report furnished by that consumer reporting agency.

Beginning in July 2011, the notice also must include a credit score (if any) that the

person used in taking adverse action, as well as

(A) the range of possible credit scores under the model used;

(B) all of the key factors that adversely affected the credit score of the consumer

in the model used, the total number of which shall not exceed four (or five, if the

number of inquiries affected the score and is not already included among the

four listed factors);

(C) the date on which the credit score was created; and

(D) the name of the person that provided the credit score or credit file upon

which the credit score was created.

The term "credit score" is defined in section 609(f)(2)(A) of the FCRA, reprinted above.

It would include a standard VantageScore@ credit score or FICO@ score, but also

might include other statistical tools used to underwrite credit or predict the

likelihood of default on a loan. The term does not include, however, a score that

considers information from outside the credit report, such as the amount of a

borrower's downpayment, the value of collateral securing a loan, or the assets or

income that a borrower discloses on a loan application.

Knowledge Check
A user of a consumer report must provide the consumer with a copy of the consumer report it used when taking adverse action.
FALSE

Risk-Based Pricing Notice

Risk-Based Pricing Notice

A lender must provide a special notice to a consumer when it charges the

consumer more for a loan based on a consumer report.

This requirement is very complex, with a detailed general rule, and several

exceptions to the general rule.


FCRA Law: Sections 615(h), 12 C.F.R. Part 1022, Subpart H
Section 615(h) - FCRA Law
Duties of users in certain credit transactions


FCRA Law: Section 615(h), 12 C.F.R. Part 1022, Subpart H

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 615(h): Duties of users in certain credit transactions

(h) Duties of users in certain credit transactions

(1) In general

Subject to rules prescribed as provided in paragraph (6), if any person uses a

consumer report in connection with an application for, or a grant, extension, or

other provision of, credit on material terms that are materially less favorable

than the most favorable terms available to a substantial proportion of

consumers from or through that person, based in whole or in part on a

consumer report, the person shall provide an oral, written, or electronic notice to

the consumer in the form and manner required by regulations prescribed in

accordance with this subsection.

(2) Timing

The notice required under paragraph (1) may be provided at the time of an

application for, or a grant, extension, or other provision of, credit or the time of

communication of an approval of an application for, or grant, extension, or other

provision of, credit, except as provided in the regulations prescribed under

paragraph (6).

(3) Exceptions

No notice shall be required from a person under this subsection if-

(A) the consumer applied for specific material terms and was granted those

terms, unless those terms were initially specified by the person after the

transaction was initiated by the consumer and after the person obtained a

consumer report; or

(B) the person has provided or will provide a notice to the consumer under

subsection (a) of this section in connection with the transaction.

(4) Other notice not sufficient

A person that is required to provide a notice under subsection (a) of this section

cannot meet that requirement by providing a notice under this subsection.

(5) Content and delivery of notice

A notice under this subsection shall, at a minimum

(A) include a statement informing the consumer that the terms offered to the

consumer are set based on information from a consumer report;

(B) identify the consumer reporting agency furnishing the report;

(C) include a statement informing the consumer that the consumer may

obtain a copy of a consumer report from that consumer reporting agency

without charge;

(D) include the contact information specified by that consumer reporting

agency for obtaining such consumer reports (including a toll-free telephone

number established by the agency in the case of a consumer reporting

agency described in section 603(p)); and

(E) include a statement informing the consumer of

(i) a numerical credit score as defined in section 609(f)(2)(A), used by such

person in making the credit decision described in paragraph (1 ) based in

whole or in part on any information in a consumer report; and

(ii) the information set forth in subparagraphs (B) through (E) of section 609(f)(1).

(6) Rulemaking

(A) Rules required

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureaul shall prescribe rules to carry out

this subsection.

(B) Content

Rules required by subparagraph (A) shall address, but are not limited to

(i) the form, content, time, and manner of delivery of any notice under

this subsection;

(ii) clarification of the meaning of terms used in this subsection, including

what credit terms are material, and when credit terms are materially less

favorable;

(iii) exceptions to the notice requirement under this subsection for classes

of persons or transactions regarding which the agencies determine that

notice would not significantly benefit consumers;

(iv) a model notice that may be used to comply with this subsection; and

(v) the timing of the notice required under paragraph (1), including the

circumstances under which the notice must be provided after the terms

offered to the consumer were set based on information from a consumer

report.

(7) Compliance

A person shall not be liable for failure to perform the duties required by this

section if, at the time of the failure, the person maintained reasonable policies

and procedures to comply with this section.

(8) Enforcement

(A) No civil actions

Sections 616 and 617 shall not apply to any failure by any person to comply

with this section.

(B) Administrative enforcement

This section shall be enforced exclusively under LFCRA S 6211 by the Federal

agencies and officials identified in that section.


Part 1022, subpart H: 
Duties of creditors regarding risk-based pricing
Section 1022.70 Scope.


Section 1022.71 Definitions.

Part 1022, Subpart H: Duties of creditors regarding risk-based pricing

Section 1022.70 Scope.

(a) Coverage. (1 ) In general. This part applies to any person that both

(i) Uses a consumer report in connection with an application for, or a grant,

extension, or other provision of, credit to a consumer that is primarily for

personal, family, or household purposes; and

(ii) Based in whole or in part on the consumer report, grants, extends, or

otherwise provides credit to the consumer on material terms that are

materially less favorable than the most favorable material terms available to

a substantial proportion of consumers from or through that person.

(2) Business credit excluded. This subpart does not apply to an application for, or

a grant, extension, or other provision of, credit to a consumer or to any other

applicant primarily for a business purpose.

(b) Enforcement. The provisions of this part will be enforced in accordance with the

enforcement authority set forth in sections 621 (a) and (b) of the FCRA.

Section 1022.71 Definitions.

For purposes of this part, the following definitions apply:

(a) Adverse action has the same meaning as in LFCRA S 603(k)(1

(b) Annual percentage rate has the same meaning as in 12 C.F.R. 1026.14(b) with

respect to an open-end credit plan and as in 12 C.F.R. 1026.22 with respect to closed-

end credit.

(c) Closed-end credit has the same meaning as in 12 C.F.R. 1026.2(a)(1 0).

(d) Consumer has the same meaning as in tFCRA 5 603 (c)).

(e) Consummation has the same meaning as in 12 C.F.R. 1 3).

(f) Consumer report has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

(g) Consumer reporting agency has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

(h) Credit has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

(i) Creditor has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

(j) Credit card has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

(k) Credit card issuer has the same meaning as in LFCRA S 603(r)(1

(l) Credit score has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

(m) Firm offer of credit has the same meaning as in LFCRA 5

(n) Material terms means--

(1) (i) Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (n)(l )(ii) and (n)(3) of this

section, in the case of credit extended under an open-end credit plan, the

annual percentage rate required to be disclosed under 12 C.F.R. 1 )

(ii) or 12 C.F.R. 1 excluding any temporary initial rate that is

lower than the rate that will apply after the temporary rate expires, any

penalty rate that will apply upon the occurrence of one or more specific

events, such as a late payment or an extension of credit that exceeds the

credit limit, and any fixed annual percentage rate option for a home equity

line of credit;

(ii) In the case of a credit card (other than a credit card that is used to access a

home equity line of credit or a charge card), the annual percentage rate

required to be disclosed under 1 2 C.F.R. 1 026.6(b)(2)(i) that applies to

purchases ("purchase annual percentage rate") and no other annual

percentage rate, or in the case of a credit card that has no purchase annual

percentage rate, the annual percentage rate that varies based on

information in a consumer report and that has the most significant financial

impact on consumers;

(2) In the case of closed-end credit, the annual percentage rate required to be

disclosed under 12 C.F.R. 1026.1 7(c) and 1026.1 8(e); and

(3) In the case of credit for which there is no annual percentage rate, the financial

term that varies based on information in a consumer report and that has the

most significant financial impact on consumers, such as a deposit required in

connection with credit extended by a telephone company or utility or an annual

membership fee for a charge card.

(o) Materially less favorable means, when applied to material terms, that the terms

granted, extended, or otherwise provided to a consumer differ from the terms

granted, extended, or otherwise provided to another consumer from or through the

same person such that the cost of credit to the first consumer would be significantly

greater than the cost of credit granted, extended, or otherwise provided to the other

consumer. For purposes of this definition, factors relevant to determining the

significance of a difference in cost include the type of credit product, the term of the

credit extension, if any, and the extent of the difference between the material terms

granted, extended, or otherwise provided to the two consumers.

(p) Open-end credit plan has the same meaning as in 15 U.S.C. 1602(i), as interpreted

by the LConsumer Financial Protection Bureaul in Regulation Z and the Official

Interpretations to Regulation Z (Supplement I to 12 C.F.R. Part 1026).

(q) Person has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

Section 1022.72 General requirements for risk-based pricing notices.

(a) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this subpart, a person must provide to

a consumer a notice ("risk-based pricing notice") in the form and manner required by

this subpart if the person both:

(1 ) Uses a consumer report in connection with an application for, or a grant,

extension, or other provision of, credit to that consumer that is primarily for

personal, family, or household purposes; and

(2) Based in whole or in part on the consumer report, grants, extends, or

otherwise provides credit to that consumer on material terms that are materially

less favorable than the most favorable material terms available to a substantial

proportion of consumers from or through that person.

(b) Determining which consumers must receive a notice. A person may determine

whether paragraph (a) of this section applies by directly comparing the material

terms offered to each consumer and the material terms offered to other consumers

for a specific type of credit product. For purposes of this section, a "specific type of

credit product" means one or more credit products with similar features that are

designed for similar purposes. Examples of a specific type of credit product include

student loans, unsecured credit cards, secured credit cards, new automobile loans,

used automobile loans, fixed-rate mortgage loans, and variable-rate mortgage

loans. As an alternative to making this direct comparison, a person may make the

determination by using one of the following methods:

(1 ) Credit score proxy method. (i) In general. A person that sets the material

terms of credit granted, extended, or otherwise provided to a consumer, based

in whole or in part on a credit score, may comply with the requirements of

paragraph (a) of this section by--

(A) Determining the credit score (hereafter referred to as the "cutoff score")

that represents the point at which approximately 40 percent of the

consumers to whom it grants, extends, or provides credit have higher credit

scores and approximately 60 percent of the consumers to whom it grants,

extends, or provides credit have lower credit scores; and

(B) Providing a risk-based pricing notice to each consumer to whom it grants,

extends, or provides credit whose credit score is lower than the cutoff score.

(ii) Alternative to the 40/60 cutoff score determination. In the case of credit that

has been granted, extended, or provided on the most favorable material terms

to more than 40 percent of consumers, a person may, at its option, set its

cutoff score at a point at which the approximate percentage of consumers who

historically have been granted, extended, or provided credit on material terms

other than the most favorable terms would receive risk-based pricing notices

under this section.

(iii) Determining the cutoff score. (A) Sampling approach. A person that

currently uses risk-based pricing with respect to the credit products it offers

must calculate the cutoff score by considering the credit scores of all or a

representative sample of the consumers to whom it has granted, extended, or

provided credit for a specific type of credit product.

(B) Secondary source approach in limited circumstances. A person that is a

new entrant into the credit business, introduces new credit products, or

starts to use risk-based pricing with respect to the credit products it currently

offers may initially determine the cutoff score based on information derived

from appropriate market research or relevant third-party sources for a

specific type of credit product, such as research or data from companies that

develop credit scores. A person that acquires a credit Portfolio as a result of a

merger or acquisition may determine the cutoff score based on information

from the party which it acquired, with which it merged, or from which it

acquired the portfolio.

(C) Recalculation of cutoff scores. A person using the credit score proxy

method must recalculate its cutoff score(s) no less than every two years in

the manner described in paragraph (b)(l )(iii)(A) of this section. A person using

the credit score proxy method using market research, third-party data, or

information from a party which it acquired, with which it merged, or from

which it acquired the portfolio as permitted by paragraph (b)(l )(iii)(B) of this

section generally must calculate a cutoff score(s) based on the scores of its

own consumers in the manner described in paragraph (b)(l )(iii)(A) of this

section within one year after it begins using a cutoff score derived from

market research, third-party data, or information from a party which it

acquired, with which it merged, or from which it acquired the portfolio. If

such a person does not grant, extend, or provide credit to new consumers

during that one-year period such that it lacks sufficient data with which to

recalculate a cutoff score based on the credit scores of its own consumers,

the person may continue to use a cutoff score derived from market research,

third-party data, or information from a party which it acquired, with which it

merged, or from which it acquired the portfolio as provided in paragraph (b)

(1 )(iii)(B) until it obtains sufficient data on which to base the recalculation.

However, the person must recalculate its cutoff score(s) in the manner

described in paragraph (b)(l )(iii)(A) of this section within two years, if it has

granted, extended, or provided credit to some new consumers during that

two-year period.

(D) Use of two or more credit scores. A person that generally uses two or

more credit scores in setting the material terms of credit granted, extended,

or provided to a consumer must determine the cutoff score using the same

method the person uses to evaluate multiple scores when making credit

decisions. These evaluation methods may include, but are not limited to,

selecting the low, median, high, most recent, or average credit score of each

consumer to whom it grants, extends, or provides credit. If a person that uses

two or more credit scores does not consistently use the same method for

evaluating multiple credit scores (e.g., if the person sometimes chooses the

median score and other times calculates the average score), the person must

determine the cutoff score using a reasonable means. In such cases, use of

any one of the methods that the person regularly uses or the average credit

score of each consumer to whom it grants, extends, or provides credit is

deemed to be a reasonable means of calculating the cutoff score.

(iv) Credit score not available. For purposes of this section, a person using the

credit score proxy method who grants, extends, or provides credit to a

consumer for whom a credit score is not available must assume that the

consumer receives credit on material terms that are materially less favorable

than the most favorable credit terms offered to a substantial proportion of

consumers from or through that person and must provide a risk-based pricing

notice to the consumer.

(v) Examples. (A) A credit card issuer engages in risk-based pricing and the

annual percentage rates it offers to consumers are based in whole or in part

on a credit score. The credit card issuer takes a representative sample of the

credit scores of consumers to whom it issued credit cards within the preceding

three months. The credit card issuer determines that approximately 40 percent

of the sampled consumers have a credit score at or above 720 (on a scale of

350 to 850) and approximately 60 percent of the sampled consumers have a

credit score below 720. Thus, the card issuer selects 720 as its cutoff score. A

consumer applies to the credit card issuer for a credit card. The card issuer

obtains a credit score for the consumer. The consumer's credit score is 700.

Since the consumer's 700 credit score falls below the 720 cutoff score, the

credit card issuer must provide a risk-based pricing notice to the consumer.

(B) A credit card issuer engages in risk-based pricing, and the annual

percentage rates it offers to consumers are based in whole or in part on a

credit score. The credit card issuer takes a representative sample of the

consumers to whom it issued credit cards over the preceding six months. The

credit card issuer determines that approximately 80 percent of the sampled

consumers received credit at its lowest annual percentage rate, and 20

percent received credit at a higher annual percentage rate. Approximately 80

percent of the sampled consumers have a credit score at or above 750 (on a

scale of 350 to 850), and 20 percent have a credit score below 750. Thus, the

card issuer selects 750 as its cutoff score. A consumer applies to the credit

card issuer for a credit card. The card issuer obtains a credit score for the

consumer. The consumer's credit score is 740. Since the consumer's 740

credit score falls below the 750 cutoff score, the credit card issuer must

provide a risk-based pricing notice to the consumer.

(C) An auto lender engages in risk-based pricing, obtains credit scores from

one of the nationwide consumer reporting agencies, and uses the credit

score proxy method to determine which consumers must receive a risk-

based pricing notice. A consumer applies to the auto lender for credit to

finance the purchase of an automobile. A credit score about that consumer is

not available from the consumer reporting agency from which the lender

obtains credit scores. The lender nevertheless grants, extends, or provides

credit to the consumer. The lender must provide a risk-based pricing notice

to the consumer.

(2) Tiered pricing method. (i) In general. A person that sets the material terms of

credit granted, extended, or provided to a consumer by placing the consumer

within one of a discrete number of pricing tiers for a specific type of credit

product, based in whole or in part on a consumer report, may comply with the

requirements of paragraph (a) of this section by providing a risk-based pricing

notice to each consumer who is not placed within the top pricing tier or tiers, as

described below.

(ii) Four or fewer pricing tiers. If a person using the tiered pricing method has

four or fewer pricing tiers, the person complies with the requirements of

paragraph (a) of this section by providing a risk-based pricing notice to each

consumer to whom it grants, extends, or provides credit who does not qualify

for the top tier (that is, the lowest-priced tier). For example, a person that uses

a tiered pricing structure with annual percentage rates of 8, 10, 12, and 14

percent would provide the risk-based pricing notice to each consumer to whom

it grants, extends, or provides credit at annual percentage rates of 1 0, 12, and

14 percent.

(iii) Five or more pricing tiers. If a person using the tiered pricing method has

five or more pricing tiers, the person complies with the requirements of

paragraph (a) of this section by providing a risk-based pricing notice to each

consumer to whom it grants, extends, or provides credit who does not qualify

for the top two tiers (that is, the two lowest-priced tiers) and any other tier that,

together with the top tiers, comprise no less than the top 30 percent but no

more than the top 40 percent of the total number of tiers. Each consumer

placed within the remaining tiers must receive a risk-based pricing notice. For

example, if a person has nine pricing tiers, the top three tiers (that is, the three

lowest-priced tiers) comprise no less than the top 30 percent but no more than

the top 40 percent of the tiers. Therefore, a person using this method would

provide a risk-based pricing notice to each consumer to whom it grants,

extends, or provides credit who is placed within the bottom six tiers.

(c) Application to credit card issuers. (1) In general. A credit card issuer subject to the

requirements of paragraph (a) of this section may use one of the methods set forth

in paragraph (b) of this section to identify consumers to whom it must provide a risk-

based pricing notice. Alternatively, a credit card issuer may satisfy its obligations

under paragraph (a) of this section by providing a risk-based pricing notice to a

consumer when:

(i) A consumer applies for a credit card either in connection with an application

program, such as a direct-mail offer or a take-one application, or in response to

a solicitation under 12 C.F.R. 1026.60, and more than a single possible

purchase annual percentage rate may apply under the program or solicitation;

and

(ii) Based in whole or in part on a consumer report, the credit card issuer

provides a credit card to the consumer with an annual percentage rate

referenced in S 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii) that is greater than the lowest annual

percentage rate referenced in S 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii) available in connection with

the application or solicitation.

(2) No requirement to compare different offers. A credit card issuer is not subject

to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section and is not required to

provide a risk-based pricing notice to a consumer if:

(i) The consumer applies for a credit card for which the card issuer provides a

single annual percentage rate referenced in S 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii), excluding a

temporary initial rate that is lower than the rate that will apply after the

temporary rate expires and a penalty rate that will apply upon the occurrence

of one or more specific events, such as a late payment or an extension of credit

that exceeds the credit limit; or

(ii) The credit card issuer offers the consumer the lowest annual percentage

rate referenced in S 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii) available under the credit card offer for

which the consumer applied, even if a lower annual percentage rate

referenced in 5 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii) is available under a different credit card offer

issued by the card issuer.

(3) Examples. (i) A credit card issuer sends a solicitation to the consumer that

discloses several possible purchase annual percentage rates that may apply,

such as 10, 12, or 14 percent, or a range of purchase annual percentage rates

from 10 to 14 percent. The consumer applies for a credit card in response to the

solicitation. The card issuer provides a credit card to the consumer with a

purchase annual percentage rate of 12 percent based in whole or in part on a

consumer report. Unless an exception applies under section 1022.74, the card

issuer may satisfy its obligations under paragraph (a) of this section by providing

a risk-based pricing notice to the consumer because the consumer received

credit at a purchase annual percentage rate greater than the lowest purchase

annual percentage rate available under that solicitation.

(ii) The same facts as in the example in paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section, except

that the card issuer provides a credit card to the consumer at a purchase

annual percentage rate of 10 percent. The card issuer is not required to

provide a risk-based pricing notice to the consumer even if, under a different

credit card solicitation, that consumer or other consumers might qualify for a

purchase annual percentage rate of 8 percent.

(d) Account review. (1) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this part, a person

is subject to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section and must provide a

risk-based pricing notice to a consumer in the form and manner required by this

subpart if the person:

(i) Uses a consumer report in connection with a review of credit that has been

extended to the consumer; and

(ii) Based in whole or in part on the consumer report, increases the annual

percentage rate (the annual percentage rate referenced in S 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii) in

the case of a credit card).

(2) Example. A credit card issuer periodically obtains consumer reports for the

purpose of reviewing the terms of credit it has extended to consumers in

connection with credit cards. As a result of this review, the credit card issuer

increases the purchase annual percentage rate applicable to a consumer's credit

(i) Uses a consumer report in connection with a review of credit that has been

extended to the consumer; and

(ii) Based in whole or in part on the consumer report, increases the annual

percentage rate (the annual percentage rate referenced in S 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii) in

the case of a credit card).

(2) Example. A credit card issuer periodically obtains consumer reports for the

purpose of reviewing the terms of credit it has extended to consumers in

connection with credit cards. As a result of this review, the credit card issuer

increases the purchase annual percentage rate applicable to a consumer's credit

that history;

(ii) A statement that the terms offered, such as the annual percentage rate,

have been set based on information from a consumer report;

(iii) A statement that the terms offered may be less favorable than the terms

offered to consumers with better credit histories;

(iv) A statement that the consumer is encouraged to verify the accuracy of the

information contained in the consumer report and has the right to dispute any

inaccurate information in the report;

(v) The identity of each consumer reporting agency that furnished a consumer


report used in the credit decision;

(vi) A statement that federal law gives the consumer the right to obtain a copy

of a consumer report from the consumer reporting agency or agencies

identified in the notice without charge for 60 days after receipt of the notice;

(vii) A statement informing the consumer how to obtain a consumer report

from the consumer reporting agency or agencies identified in the notice and

providing contact information (including a toll-free telephone number, where

applicable) specified by the consumer reporting agency or agencies;

(viii) A statement directing consumers to the Web site of the Consumer

Financial Protection Bureau) to obtain more information about consumer

reports; and

(ix) If a credit score of the consumer to whom a person grants, extends or

otherwise provides credit is used in setting the material terms of credit:

(A) A statement that a credit score is a number that takes into account

information in a consumer report, that the consumer's credit score was used

to set the terms of credit offered, and that a credit score can change over

time to reflect changes in the consumer's credit history;

(B) The credit score used by the person in making the credit decision;

(C) The range of possible credit scores under the model used to generate the

credit score;

(D) All of the key factors that adversely affected the credit score, which shall

not exceed four key factors, except that if one of the key factors is the

number of enquiries made with respect to the consumer report, the number

of key factors shall not exceed five;

(E) The date on which the credit score was created; and

(F) The name of the consumer reporting agency or other person that provides

the credit score.

(2) Account review. The risk-based pricing notice required by S 1 022.72(d) must

include:

(i) A statement that a consumer report (or credit report) includes information

about the consumer's credit history and the type of information included in

that credit history;

(ii) A statement that the person has conducted a review of the account using

information from a consumer report;

(iii) A statement that as a result of the review, the annual percentage rate on

the account has been increased based on information from a consumer report;

(iv) A statement that the consumer is encouraged to verify the accuracy of the

information contained in the consumer report and has the right to dispute any

inaccurate information in the report;

(v) The identity of each consumer reporting agency that furnished a consumer

report used in the account review;

(vi) A statement that Federal law gives the consumer the right to obtain a copy

of a consumer report from the consumer reporting agency or agencies

identified in the notice without charge for 60 days after receipt of the notice;

(vii) A statement informing the consumer how to obtain a consumer report

from the consumer reporting agency or agencies identified in the notice and

providing contact information (including a toll-free telephone number, where

applicable) specified by the consumer reporting agency or agencies;

(viii) A statement directing consumers to the Web site of the LConsumer

Financial Protection Bureaul to obtain more information about consumer

reports; and

(xi) If a credit score of the consumer to whom a person grants, extends, or

otherwise provides credit is used in setting the material terms of credit:

(A) A statement that a credit score is a number that takes into account

information in a consumer report, that the consumer's credit score was used

to set the terms of credit offered, and that a credit score can change over

time to reflect changes in the consumer's credit history;

(B) The credit score used by the person in making the credit decision;

(C) The range of possible credit scores under the model used to generate the

credit score;

(D) All of the key factors that adversely affected the credit score, which shall

not exceed four key factors, except that if one of the key factors is the

number of enquiries made with respect to the consumer report, the number

of key factors shall not exceed five;

(E) The date on which the credit score was created; and

(F) The name of the consumer reporting agency or other person that

provided the credit score.

(b) Form of the notice. (1) In general. The risk-based pricing notice required by 5

1022.72(a), (c), or (d) must be: (i) Clear and conspicuous; and (ii) Provided to the

consumer in oral, written, or electronic form.

(2) Model forms. Model forms of the risk-based pricing notice required by S

1 022.72(a) and (c) are contained in Appendices H-1 and H-6 of this part.

Appropriate use of Model Form H-1 or H-6 is deemed to comply with the

requirements of 5 1 022.72(a) and (c). Model forms of the risk-based pricing notice

required by S 1 022.72(d) are contained in Appendices H-2 and H-7 of this part.

Appropriate use of Model Form H-2 or H-7 is deemed to comply with the

requirements of S 1022.72(d). Use of the model forms is optional.

(c) Timing. (1 ) General. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, a risk-

based pricing notice must be provided to the consumer:

(i) In the case of a grant, extension, or other provision of closed-end credit,

before consummation of the transaction, but not earlier than the time the

decision to approve an application for, or a grant, extension, or other provision

of, credit, is communicated to the consumer by the person required to provide

the notice;

(ii) In the case of credit granted, extended, or provided under an open-end

credit plan, before the first transaction is made under the plan, but not earlier

than the time the decision to approve an application for, or a grant, extension,

or other provision of, credit is communicated to the consumer by the person

required to provide the notice; or

(iii) In the case of a review of credit that has been extended to the consumer, at

the time the decision to increase the annual percentage rate (annual

percentage rate referenced in S 1022.71 (n)(l )(ii) in the case of a credit card)

based on a consumer report is communicated to the consumer by the person

required to provide the notice, or if no notice of the increase in the annual

percentage rate is provided to the consumer prior to the effective date of the

change in the annual percentage rate (to the extent permitted by law), no later

than five days after the effective date of the change in the annual percentage

rate.

(2) Application to certain automobile lending transactions. When a person to

whom a credit obligation is initially payable grants, extends, or provides credit to

a consumer for the purpose of financing the purchase of an automobile from an

auto dealer or other party that is not affiliated with the person, any requirement

to provide a risk-based pricing notice pursuant to this subpart is satisfied if the

person:

(i) Provides a notice described in section SS 1022.72(a), 1022.74(e), or 1 022.74(f)

to the consumer within the time periods set forth in paragraph (c)(l )(i) of this

section, S 1 022.74(e)(3), or S 1022.74(0(4), as applicable; or

(ii) Arranges to have the auto dealer or other party provide a notice described

in SS 1022.72(a), 1022.74(e), or 1 022.74(f) to the consumer on its behalf within

the time periods set forth in paragraph (c)(l )(i) of this section, S 1 or

S 1 as applicable, and maintains reasonable policies and

procedures to verify that the auto dealer or other party provides such notice to

the consumer within the applicable time periods. If the person arranges to

have the auto dealer or other party provide a notice described in 5 1 022.74(e),

the person's obligation is satisfied if the consumer receives a notice containing

a credit score obtained by the dealer or other party, even if a different credit

score is obtained and used by the person on whose behalf the notice is

provided.

(3) Timing requirements for contemporaneous purchase credit. When credit

under an open-end credit plan is granted, extended, or provided to a consumer

in person or by telephone for the purpose of financing the contemporaneous

purchase of goods or services, any risk-based pricing notice required to be

provided pursuant to this subpart (or the disclosures permitted under section 5
1 022.74(e) or (f)) may be provided at the earlier of:

(i) The time of the first mailing by the person to the consumer after the decision

is made to approve the grant, extension, or other provision of open-end credit,

such as in a mailing containing the account agreement or a credit card; or

(ii) Within 30 days after the decision to approve the grant, extension, or other

provision of credit.

(d) Multiple credit scores. (1) In general. When a person obtains or creates two or

more credit scores and uses one of those credit scores in setting the material terms

of credit, for example, by using the low, middle, high, or most recent score, the

notices described in paragraphs (a)(l ) and (2) of this section must include that credit

score and information relating to that credit score required by paragraphs (a)(l )(ix)

and (a)(2)(ix). When a person obtains or creates two or more credit scores and uses

multiple credit scores in setting the material terms of credit by, for example,

computing the average of all the credit scores obtained or created, the notices

described in paragraphs (a)(l) and (2) of this section must include one of those credit

scores and information relating to credit scores required by paragraphs (a)(l )(ix) and

(a)(2)(ix). The notice may, at the person's option, include more than one credit score,

along with the additional information specified in paragraphs (a)(l )(ix) and (a)(2)(ix)

of this section for each credit score disclosed.

(2) Examples. (i) A person that uses consumer reports to set the material terms of

credit cards granted, extended, or provided to consumers regularly requests

credit scores from several consumer reporting agencies and uses the low score

when determining the material terms it will offer to the consumer. That person

must disclose the low score in the notices described in paragraphs (a)(l ) and (2)

of this section.

(ii) A person that uses consumer reports to set the material terms of

automobile loans granted, extended, or provided to consumers regularly

requests credit scores from several consumer reporting agencies, each of

which it uses in an underwriting program in order to determine the material

terms it will offer to the consumer. That person may choose one of these

scores to include in the notices described in paragraph (a)(l) and (2) of this

section.

Section 1022.74 Exceptions.

(a) Application for specific terms. (1) In general. A person is not required to provide a

risk-based pricing notice to the consumer under S 1 022.72(a) or (c) if the consumer

applies for specific material terms and is granted those terms, unless those terms

were specified by the person using a consumer report after the consumer applied

for or requested credit and after the person obtained the consumer report. For


purposes of this section, "specific material terms" means a single material term, or

set of material terms, such as an annual percentage rate of 10 percent, and not a

range of alternatives, such as an annual percentage rate that may be 8, 10, or 12

percent, or between 8 and 12 percent.

(2) Example. A consumer receives a firm offer of credit from a credit card issuer.

The terms of the firm offer are based in whole or in part on information from a

consumer report that the credit card issuer obtained under the FCRA's firm offer

of credit provisions. The solicitation offers the consumer a credit card with a

single purchase annual percentage rate of 1 2 percent. The consumer applies for

and receives a credit card with an annual percentage rate of 12 percent. Other

customers with the same credit card have a purchase annual percentage rate of

1 0 percent. The exception applies because the consumer applied for specific

material terms and was granted those terms. Although the credit card issuer

specified the annual percentage rate in the firm offer of credit based in whole or

in part on a consumer report, the credit card issuer specified that material term

before, not after, the consumer applied for or requested credit.

(b) Adverse action notice. A person is not required to provide a risk-based pricing

notice to the consumer under Sl 022.72(a), (c), or (d) if the person provides an

adverse action notice to the consumer under section 61 5(a) of the FCRA.

(c) Prescreened solicitations. (1 ) In general. A person is not required to provide a risk-

based pricing notice to the consumer under 5 1 022.72(a) or (c) if the person:

(i) Obtains a consumer report that is a prescreened list as described in section

of the FCRA; and

(ii) Uses the consumer report for the purpose of making a firm offer of credit to

the consumer.

(2) More favorable material terms. This exception applies to any firm offer of

credit offered by a person to a consumer, even if the person makes other firm

offers of credit to other consumers on more favorable material terms.

(3) Example. A credit card issuer obtains two prescreened lists from a consumer

reporting agency. One list includes consumers with high credit scores. The other

list includes consumers with low credit scores. The issuer mails a firm offer of

credit to the high credit score consumers with a single purchase annual

percentage rate of 10 percent. The issuer also mails a firm offer of credit to the

low credit score consumers with a single purchase annual percentage rate of 14

percent. The credit card issuer is not required to provide a risk-based pricing

notice to the low credit score consumers who receive the 14 percent offer

because use of a consumer report to make a firm offer of credit does not trigger

the risk-based pricing notice requirement.

(d) Loans secured by residential real property--credit score disclosure. (1) In general.

A person is not required to provide a risk-based pricing notice to a consumer under S

1022.726) or (c) if:

(i) The consumer requests from the person an extension of credit that is or will

be secured by one to four units of residential real property; and

(ii) The person provides to each consumer described in paragraph (d)(l )(i) of

this section a notice that contains the following:

(A) A statement that a consumer report (or credit report) is a record of the

consumer's credit history and includes information about whether the

consumer pays his or her obligations on time and how much the consumer

owes to creditors;

(B) A statement that a credit score is a number that takes into account

information in a consumer report and that a credit score can change over

time to reflect changes in the consumer's credit history;

(C) A statement that the consumer's credit score can affect whether the

consumer can obtain credit and what the cost of that credit will be;

(D) The information required to be disclosed to the consumer pursuant to

section 609(g) of the FCRA;

(E) The distribution of credit scores among consumers who are scored under

the same scoring model that is used to generate the consumer's credit score

using the same scale as that of the credit score that is provided to the

consumer, presented in the form of a bar graph containing a minimum of six

bars that illustrates the percentage of consumers with credit scores within

the range of scores reflected in each bar or by other clear and readily

understandable graphical means, or a clear and readily understandable

statement informing the consumer how his or her credit score compares to

the scores of other consumers. Use of a graph or statement obtained from

the person providing the credit score that meets the requirements of this

paragraph (d)(l )(ii)(E) is deemed to comply with this requirement;

(F) A statement that the consumer is encouraged to verify the accuracy of the

information contained in the consumer report and has the right to dispute

any inaccurate information in the report;

(G) A statement that Federal law gives the consumer the right to obtain

copies of his or her consumer reports directly from the consumer reporting

agencies, including a free report from each of the nationwide consumer

reporting agencies once during any 12-month period;

(H) Contact information for the centralized source from which consumers

may obtain their free annual consumer reports; and

(l) A statement directing consumers to the Web site of the Consumer

Financial Protection Bureau to obtain more information about consumer

reports.

(2) Form of the notice. The notice described in paragraph (d)(l )(ii) of this section

must be:

(i) Clear and conspicuous;

(ii) Provided on or with the notice required by section 609(g) of the FCRA;

(iii) Segregated from other information provided to the consumer, except for

the notice required by section 609(g) of the FCRA; and

(iv) Provided to the consumer in writing and in a form that the consumer may

keep.

(3) Timing. The notice described in paragraph (d)(l )(ii) of this section must be

provided to the consumer at the time the disclosure required by section 609(g) of

the FCRA is provided to the consumer, but in any event at or before

consummation in the case of closed-end credit or before the fi rst transaction is

made under an open-end credit plan.

(4) Multiple credit scores. (i) In general. When a person obtains two or more

credit scores from consumer reporting agencies and uses one of those credit

scores in setting the material terms of credit granted, extended, or otherwise

provided to a consumer, for example, by using the low, middle, high, or most

recent score, the notice described in paragraph (d)(l )(ii) of this section must

include that credit score and the other information required by that paragraph.

When a person obtains two or more credit scores from consumer reporting

agencies and uses multiple credit scores in setting the material terms of credit

granted, extended, or otherwise provided to a consumer, for example, by

computing the average of all the credit scores obtained, the notice described in

paragraph (d)(l )(ii) of this section must include one of those credit scores and the

other information required by that paragraph. The notice may, at the person's

option, include more than one credit score, along with the additional information

specified in paragraph (d)(l )(ii) of this section for each credit score disclosed.

(ii) Examples. (A) A person that uses consumer reports to set the material terms

of mortgage credit granted, extended, or provided to consumers regularly

requests credit scores from several consumer reporting agencies and uses the

low score when determining the material terms it will offer to the consumer.

That person must disclose the low score in the notice described in paragraph

(d)(l )(ii) of this section.

(B) A person that uses consumer reports to set the material terms of

mortgage credit granted, extended, or provided to consumers regularly

requests credit scores from several consumer reporting agencies, each of

which it uses in an underwriting program in order to determine the material

terms it will offer to the consumer. That person may choose one of these

scores to include in the notice described in paragraph (d)(l )(ii) of this section.

(5) Model form. A model form of the notice described in paragraph (d)(l )(ii) of this

section consolidated with the notice required by section 609(g) of the FCRA is

contained in Appendix H-3 of this part. Appropriate use of Model Form H-3 is

deemed to comply with the requirements of S 1 022.74(d). Use of the model form

is optional.

(e) Other extensions of credit--credit score disclosure. (1 ) In general. A person is not

required to provide a risk-based pricing notice to a consumer under 51 022.72(a) or

(c) if:

(i) The consumer requests from the person an extension of credit other than

credit that is or will be secured by one to four units of residential real property;

and

(ii) The person provides to each consumer described in paragraph (e)(l )(i) of

this section a notice that contains the following:

(A) A statement that a consumer report (or credit report) is a record of the

consumer's credit history and includes information about whether the

consumer pays his or her obligations on time and how much the consumer

owes to creditors;

(B) A statement that a credit score is a number that takes into account

information in a consumer report and that a credit score can change over

time to reflect changes in the consumer's credit history;

(C) A statement that the consumer's credit score can affect whether the

consumer can obtain credit and what the cost of that credit will be;

(D) The current credit score of the consumer or the most recent credit score

of the consumer that was previously calculated by the consumer reporting

agency for a purpose related to the extension of credit;

(E) The range of possible credit scores under the model used to generate the

credit score;

(F) The distribution of credit scores among consumers who are scored under

the same scoring model that is used to generate the consumer's credit score

using the same scale as that of the credit score that is provided to the

consumer, presented in the form of a bar graph containing a minimum of six

bars that illustrates the percentage of consumers with credit scores within

the range of scores reflected in each bar, or by other clear and readily

understandable graphical means, or a clear and readily understandable

statement informing the consumer how his or her credit score compares to

the scores of other consumers. Use of a graph or statement obtained from

the person providing the credit score that meets the requirements of this

paragraph (e)(l )(ii)(F) is deemed to comply with this requirement;

(G) The date on which the credit score was created;

(H) The name of the consumer reporting agency or other person that

provided the credit score;

(l) A statement that the consumer is encouraged to verify the accuracy of the
information contained in the consumer report and has the right to dispute

any inaccurate information in the report;

0) A statement that Federal law gives the consumer the right to obtain copies

of his or her consumer reports directly from the consumer reporting

agencies, including a free report from each of the nationwide consumer

reporting agencies once during any 12-month period;

(K) Contact information for the centralized source from which consumers

may obtain their free annual consumer reports; and

(L) A statement directing consumers to the Web site of the LConsumer

Financial Protection Bureau) to obtain more information about consumer


reports.

(2) Form of the notice. The notice described in paragraph (e)(l )(ii) of this section

must be:

(i) Clear and conspicuous;

(ii) Segregated from other information provided to the consumer; and

(iii) Provided to the consumer in writing and in a form that the consumer may

keep.

(3) Timing. The notice described in paragraph (e)(l )(ii) of this section must be


provided to the consumer as soon as reasonably practicable after the credit

score has been obtained, but in any event at or before consummation in the

case of closed-end credit or before the first transaction is made under an open-

end credit plan.

(4) Multiple credit scores. (i) In General. When a person obtains two or more

credit scores from consumer reporting agencies and uses one of those credit

scores in setting the material terms of credit granted, extended, or otherwise

provided to a consumer, for example, by using the low, middle, high, or most

recent score, the notice described in paragraph (e)(l )(ii) of this section must

include that credit score and the other information required by that paragraph.

When a person obtains two or more credit scores from consumer reporting

agencies and uses multiple credit scores in setting the material terms of credit

granted, extended, or otherwise provided to a consumer, for example, by

computing the average of all the credit scores obtained, the notice described in

paragraph (e)(l )(ii) of this section must include one of those credit scores and the

other information required by that paragraph. The notice may, at the person's

option, include more than one credit score, along with the additional information

specified in paragraph (e)(l )(ii) of this section for each credit score disclosed.

(ii) Examples. The manner in which multiple credit scores are to be disclosed

under this section are substantially identical to the manner set forth in the

examples contained in paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of this section.

(5) Model form. A model form of the notice described in paragraph (e)(l )(ii) of this

section is contained in Appendix H-4 of this part. Appropriate use of Model Form

H-4 is deemed to comply with the requirements of S 1022.74(e). Use of the model

form is optional.

(f) Credit score not available. (1 ) In general. A person is not required to provide a risk-

based pricing notice to a consumer under S 1 022.72(a) or (c) if the person:

(i) Regularly obtains credit scores from a consumer reporting agency and

provides credit score disclosures to consumers in accordance with paragraphs

(d) or (e) of this section, but a credit score is not available from the consumer

reporting agency from which the person regularly obtains credit scores for a

consumer to whom the person grants, extends, or provides credit;

(ii) Does not obtain a credit score from another consumer reporting agency in

connection with granting, extending, or providing credit to the consumer; and

(iii) Provides to the consumer a notice that contains the following:

(A) A statement that a consumer report (or credit report) includes

information about the consumer's credit history and the type of information

included in that history;

(B) A statement that a credit score is a number that takes into account

information in a consumer report and that a credit score can change over

time in response to changes in the consumer's credit history;

(C) A statement that credit scores are important because consumers with

higher credit scores generally obtain more favorable credit terms;

(D) A statement that not having a credit score can affect whether the

consumer can obtain credit and what the cost of that credit will be;

(E) A statement that a credit score about the consumer was not available

from a consumer reporting agency, which must be identified by name,

generally due to insufficient information regarding the consumer's credit

history;

(F) A statement that the consumer is encouraged to verify the accuracy of the

information contained in the consumer report and has the right to dispute

any inaccurate information in the consumer report;

(G) A statement that Federal law gives the consumer the right to obtain

copies of his or her consumer reports directly from the consumer reporting

agencies, including a free consumer report from each of the nationwide

consumer reporting agencies once during any 12-month period;

(H) The contact information for the centralized source from which consumers

may obtain their free annual consumer reports; and

(l) A statement directing consumers to the Web site of the LConsumer

Financial Protection Bureau) to obtain more information about consumer

reports.

(2) Example. A person that uses consumer reports to set the material terms of

non-mortgage credit granted, extended, or provided to consumers regularly

requests credit scores from a particular consumer reporting agency and provides

those credit scores and additional information to consumers to satisfy the

requirements of paragraph (e) of this section. That consumer reporting agency

provides to the person a consumer report on a particular consumer that

contains one trade line, but does not provide the person with a credit score on

that consumer. If the person does not obtain a credit score from another

consumer reporting agency and, based in whole or in part on information in a

consumer report, grants, extends, or provides credit to the consumer, the person

may provide the notice described in paragraph (f)(l )(iii) of this section. If,

however, the person obtains a credit score from another consumer reporting

agency, the person may not rely upon the exception in paragraph (f) of this

section, but may satisfy the requirements of paragraph (e) of this section.

(3) Form of the notice. The notice described in paragraph (f)(l )(iii) of this section

must be:

(i) Clear and conspicuous;

(ii) Segregated from other information provided to the consumer;

and

(iii) Provided to the consumer in writing and in a form that the consumer may

keep.

(4) Timing. The notice described in paragraph (f)(l )(iii) of this section must be

provided to the consumer as soon as reasonably practicable after the person has

requested the credit score, but in any event not later than consummation of a

transaction in the case of closed-end credit or when the first transaction is made

(i) Clear and conspicuous;

(ii) Segregated from other information provided to the consumer;

and

(iii) Provided to the consumer in writing and in a form that the consumer may

keep.

(4) Timing. The notice described in paragraph (f)(l )(iii) of this section must be

provided to the consumer as soon as reasonably practicable after the person has

requested the credit score, but in any event not later than consummation of a

transaction in the case of closed-end credit or when the first transaction is made

under an open-end credit plan.

(5) Model form. A model form of the notice described in paragraph (f)(l )(iii) of this

section is contained in Appendix H-5 of this part. Appropriate use of Model Form

H-5 is deemed to comply with the requirements of S 1022.74(f). Use of the model

form is optional.

Section 1022.75 Rules of construction.

For purposes of this subpart, the following rules of construction apply:

(a) One notice per credit extension. A consumer is entitled to no more than one risk-

based pricing notice under S 1 022.72(a) or (c), or one notice under S 1 022.74(d), (e),

or (f), for each grant, extension, or other provision of credit. Notwithstanding the

foregoing, even if a consumer has previously received a risk-based pricing notice in

connection with a grant, extension, or other provision of credit, another risk-based

pricing notice is required if the conditions set forth in S 1 022.72(d) have been met.

(b) Multi-party transactions. (1) Initial creditor. The person to whom a credit

obligation is initially payable must provide the risk-based pricing notice described in

S 1 022.72(a) or (c), or satisfy the requirements for and provide the notice required

under one of the exceptions in S 1022.74(d), (e), or (f), even if that person

immediately assigns the credit agreement to a third party and is not the source of

funding for the credit.

(2) Purchasers or assignees. A purchaser or assignee of a credit contract with a

consumer is not subject to the requirements of this subpart and is not required

to provide the risk-based pricing notice described in 5 1 022.72(a) or (c), or satisfy

the requirements for and provide the notice required under one of the

exceptions in Sl 022.74(d), (e), or (f).

(3) Example. A consumer obtains credit to finance the purchase of an

automobile. If a bank or finance company is the person to whom the loan

obligation is initially payable, the bank or finance company must provide the risk-

based pricing notice to the consumer (or satisfy the requirements for and

provide the notice required under one of the exceptions noted above) based on

the terms offered by that bank or finance company only. The auto dealer has no

duty to provide a risk-based pricing notice to the consumer. However, the bank

or finance company may comply with this rule if the auto dealer has agreed to

provide notices to consumers before consummation pursuant to an

arrangement with the bank or finance company, as permitted under S

1 022.73(c).

(c) Multiple consumers. (1 ) Risk-based pricing notices. In a transaction involving two

or more consumers who are granted, extended, or otherwise provided credit, a

person must provide a notice to each consumer to satisfy the requirements of 5

1 022.72(a) or (c). Whether the consumers have the same address or not, the person

must provide a separate notice to each consumer if a notice includes a credit

score(s). Each separate notice that includes a credit score(s) must contain only the

credit score(s) of the consumer to whom the notice is provided, and not the credit

score(s) of the other consumer. If the consumers have the same address, and the

notice does not include a credit score(s), a person may satisfy the requirements by

providing a single notice addressed to both consumers.

(2) Credit score disclosure notices. In a transaction involving two or more

consumers who are granted, extended, or otherwise provided credit, a person

must provide a separate notice to each consumer to satisfy the exceptions in 5

1 022.74(d), (e), or (f). Whether the consumers have the same address or not, the

a person must provide a separate notice to each consumer. Each separate notice

must contain only the credit score(s) of the consumer to whom the notice is

provided, and not the credit score(s) of the other consumer.

(3) Examples. (i) Two consumers jointly apply for credit with a creditor. The

the creditor obtains credit scores on both consumers. Based in part on the credit

scores, the creditor grants credit to the consumers on material terms that are

materially less favorable than the most favorable terms available to other

consumers from the creditor. The creditor provides risk-based pricing notices to

satisfy its obligations under this subpart. The creditor must provide a separate

risk-based pricing notice to each consumer whether the consumers have the

same address or not. Each risk-based pricing notice must contain only the credit

score(s) of the consumer to whom the notice is provided.

(ii) Two consumers jointly apply for credit with a creditor. The two consumers

reside at the same address. The creditor obtains credit scores on each of the

two consumer applicants. The creditor grants credit to the consumers. The

creditor provides credit score disclosure notices to satisfy its obligations under

this subpart. Even though the two consumers reside at the same address, the

creditor must provide a separate credit score disclosure notice to each of the

consumers. Each notice must contain only the credit score of the consumer to

whom the notice is provided.

Explanation of Section 615(h), Part 1022m Subpart H:


Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 615(h), 12 C.F.R. Part 1022, Subpart H

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

If a lender does not reject a loan application, but instead charges the borrower or

applicant more for credit based on a consumer report, the lender may be required

to send a "Risk-Based Pricing Notice" which informs the borrower or applicant that

he or she may not have received the most advantageous credit terms.

Section 61 5(h) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act requires the Consumer Financial

Protection Bureau ("CFPB") to make a rule requiring creditors that use a credit report

or score in connection with a credit decision to send to a consumer a notice when,

based on a credit report or score, the creditor grants credit on "material terms that

are materially less favorable than the most favorable terms available to a substantial

proportion of consumers." Creditors subject to this rule include a bank, a mortgage

lender, an auto lender, or a public utility. The FCRA provision, and the rule made by

the CFPB are reprinted above.

This rule is referred to as the Risk-Based Pricing Rule, and it requires lenders to notify

consumers when the lender charges a consumer more for credit based on the

individual's consumer report. The requirement was motivated by a concern that,

while lenders were providing consumers with "adverse action" notices under the

FCRA when they denied a loan application, they were not notifying consumers of any

negative effects of credit reports on the pricing of credit when the lenders approved

the loan, but for terms less favorable than those provided to other consumers -

hence the name "Risk-Based Pricing Rule."

The Rule applies to you if you use consumer reports or scores in connection with

credit decisions. If you do not use consumer reports or scores, then you are not

covered. Moreover, if you use credit reports or scores, but only in connection with

insurance, leasing or other non-credit decisions, you are not covered by the Rule.

In addition, the Bureau has laid out some helpful ground rules for who must provide

notices and who must receive notices:

Notices need to be provided only in connection with credit extended to an

individual for his or her own personal, family or household use.

o Notice is not required in connection with business credit.

o Notice is not required to be provided to guarantors, co-signers, endorsers or

sureties.

Only the creditor to whom an obligation is initially payable is required to provide

the notice.

o An assignee or other purchaser that purchases debt in the secondary market

is not required to provide notice.

S The person to whom the credit is initially payable must provide the

notice, even if the person assigns the credit immediately.

o A mortgage broker or other broker or arranger of credit is not required to

provide the notice.

There is a special exception for auto lending: If the creditor to whom the credit

obligation is initially payable grants credit for purchase of an automobile from a

dealer not affiliated with the creditor, the creditor can arrange for the auto

dealer to provide the notice. The creditor must maintain reasonable policies and

procedures to ensure that the auto dealer provides the notice.

General Rule

The Bureau has provided a general requirement that you must provide a Risk-Based

Pricing Notice if:

You use a credit report or score in connection with a credit transaction, and

Based on the credit report or score, you provide credit to the consumer:

o On material terms

o That are materially less favorable than the most favorable terms

o Available to a substantial proportion of consumers from or through you.

The Bureau has provided some additional guidance as to the meaning of the

italicized terms:

Material Terms generally means Annual Percentage Rate ("APR"), and more

specifically means:

o Open-end credit: APR, excluding any temporary initial rate, penalty rate, or

fixed rate home equity line of credit ("HELOC") option;

o Credit card: Purchase APR, and if no purchase APR, then the APR that varies

based on a credit report or score and "has the most significant financial

impact" on consumers;

o Closed-end credit: APR; and

o Credit for which there is no APR (e.g., telecom, utility, charge card): The term

that varies based on a credit report or score and "has the most significant

financial impact" on consumers - such as, a utility deposit or a charge card

annual membership fee.

Materially Less Favorable means that, as a result of the terms imposed, the cost

of credit will be "significantly greater" for the consumer. The factors to be

considered in determining "significance" include the type of credit and the term

of credit. For example, a 25 basis point difference in APR may be "significant" for

a 30-year mortgage, but may be less "significant" for a 48-month auto loan.

The Bureau does not define Substantial Proportion, but state that it must be

more than a de minimis percentage of consumers, and may or may not represent

a majority of consumers. This requirement limits the notices only to those

consumers who are most affected by the "risk-based pricing." The Bureau feared

that, if a lender sends notices to all or almost all of its applicants, the impact of

the notices on consumers would be diminished.

Determining Who Receives a Notice

The Bureau provides a variety of methods of determining who is to receive notices.

The Direct Comparison Method requires a transaction-specific determination and

may be difficult to implement on a day-to-day basis. As an alternative, the Bureau

offers a variety of short-cuts, or proxies, for a transaction-specific determination of

whether a specific consumer should receive a notice. You may choose different

methods for different types of credit products.

Direct Comparison Method

Under the Direct Comparison Method, you would need to determine on a case by

case basis whether a consumer had received materially less favorable terms than

the terms a substantial proportion of consumers have received from or through you.

After identifying the appropriate subset of your current or past consumers to

compare to any given consumer and after eliminating any underwriting criteria that

do not depend upon consumer report information, you should look at the following

factors:

What is the best APR (or other material term) offered to a substantial proportion

of consumers?

o A "substantial proportion" is more than a de minimis number of consumers,

but not necessarily more than a majority.

Is the APR offered to the consumer less favorable than the best APR offered to a

substantial proportion of consumers?

o Directly compare the APR offered to a consumer for a "specific type of credit

product" with the best APR offered to a substantial proportion of consumers.

S Examples of "specific type of credit product": student loan, signature loan,

secured card, unsecured card, auto loan, used auto loan, mortgage loan,

adjustable rate mortgage.

Is the APR offered to the consumer "materially less favorable"?

o Will the cost of credit be "significantly greater" for the consumer?

Credit Score Proxy Method

Under the Credit Score Proxy Method, you must provide notice to every consumer

whose credit score falls below the cut-off score: a calculated credit score which 40%

of consumers are above and 60% are below. You must determine your own cut-off

score for each specific type of credit product you offer at least once every two years.

As an alternative to the 40/60 cutoff score determination, where you give the best

terms to more than 40% of consumers, you may set the cut-off score at the point

where consumers historically have been given less-than-the-best terms.

Where you have just begun offering a specific type of credit product and do not have

any historic experience, you may use market research to determine your cut-off

score, but you must calculate a true cut-off score within one year or after you have

accumulated enough data to calculate a reliable cut-off score.

If you purchase a credit portfolio as a result of a merger or acquisition, you also may

apply this alternative approach using information obtained from which you acquired

the portfolio.

Where a consumer has no credit score - if, for example, the consumer reporting

agency from which you are obtaining credit scores does not have enough

information to generate a score for the consumer - you must assume that the

consumer is below your cut-off score.

Tiered Pricing Method

If you price credit by placing consumers in tiers, you can use your own tiers as a

proxy for the substantial proportion calculation. If you use four or fewer tiers, you

must provide notice to everyone who does not qualify for the top tier. If you use five

or more tiers, you must provide notice to everyone who does not fall within the tiers

comprising the top 30% to 40% of the number of tiers. To illustrate, with five tiers,

notices go to tier numbers 3, 4 and 5; with nine tiers, notices go to tier numbers 4

through 9 (i.e., not less than 30%, nor more than 40%).

Content, Format and Delivery of Risk-Based Notice

The Bureau has provided model form notices which provide a safe harbor for

compliance. Generally, notices must:

Be clear and conspicuous;

Be provided either in oral, written or electronic form

State that a credit report includes information about a consumer's credit history;

Describe the type of information in credit reports;

State that the credit terms have been set based on a credit report or score;

State that the terms may be less favorable than the terms offered to consumers

with better credit histories;

Encourage consumers to verify the accuracy of the information in their credit

report and inform them that they have a right to dispute any inaccurate

information;

Provide name and contact information for each consumer reporting agency that

provided you with a credit report (and toll-free number for nationwide consumer

reporting agencies, such as, Equifax, Experian, or TransUnion);

Notify the consumer that he or she can obtain a free credit report without charge

60 days after receiving the notice; and

Direct consumers to CFPB Web site for more information about credit reports

and their FCRA rights.

You may elect to put the name of the consumer, account numbers, date or other

information that may assist in identifying the transaction without losing the safe-

harbor protection. The timing varies based on the type of credit being extended. In

cases of closed-end credit, such as a mortgage or auto loan, the notice must be sent

before consummation, but not earlier than when the decision to approve is

communicated to the consumer. In the case of open-end credit plans, such as a

credit card or HELOC, the notice must be sent before the first transaction is made
under the plan, but not earlier than when the decision to approve is communicated

to the consumer.

Exceptions to Notice Requirements

Application for Specific Terms

You are not required to provide notice to a consumer who applies for specific terms

and is granted those terms (unless the terms were specified by you after reviewing a

credit report or score).


Specific terms means a single term, not a range of terms (e.g., APR from to

20%).

Example: You are not required to provide a notice to a consumer who receives a

prescreened card offer with a 12% purchase APR and applies for and receives the

card with a 12% purchase APR.

Prescreened Solicitations

You are not required to provide notice to a consumer if you use a credit report or

score to make a "firm offer" of credit, even where you make other firm offers of

credit to other consumers on more favorable terms.

Adverse Action Notice

You are not required to provide notice to a consumer if you provide an "adverse

action" notice to the consumer.

Credit Score Disclosure Exceptions

The Bureau has provided two exceptions to the general rule, intended to streamline

compliance by eliminating the need to determine who is required to receive a notice,
and the need to target a notice to those individuals. In exchange for streamlined

compliance, creditors commit to providing all applicants (not just a "substantial

proportion" of consumers who receive credit) with a special notice which contains

the consumer's credit score, as well as additional information about credit scores.

One of these exceptions applies only to real estate-secured credit - i.e., home

mortgages and HELOCs - and the other can be used in connection with all other

credit. You are not permitted, however, to use a credit score disclosure exception

notice in lieu of an account review notice.

As with other notices, the Bureau has provided model forms for the credit score

disclosure exception notices. If you decide not to use the models, your notice must:

Disclose the consumer's credit score and the date the score was created.

Show the distribution of credit scores under the same model used to score the

consumer, using the same scale (e.g., 0 to 850).

o Distribution must be presented in a bar graph, other graph, or simple

narrative.

Name the entity that provided the score.

Identify the range of possible credit scores.

disclosure exception notices. If you decide not to use the models, your notice must:

Disclose the consumer's credit score and the date the score was created.

Show the distribution of credit scores under the same model used to score the

consumer, using the same scale (e.g., 0 to 850).

o Distribution must be presented in a bar graph, other graph, or simple

narrative.

Name the entity that provided the score.

Identify the range of possible credit scores.

Provide the key factors that adversely affected the score.

Include statements:

o Encouraging the consumer to check his or her credit report for inaccuracies

and advising the consumer of his or her right to dispute inaccuracies;

o Informing the consumer that consumer report is a record of the consumer's

credit history and includes information about whether a consumer pays his

or her obligations on time and how much the consumer owes to creditors.

o Explaining that a credit score takes into account information in a credit


report and can change over time.

o Providing that a consumer's credit score can affect whether the consumer

can obtain credit and what the cost of that credit will be.

o Notifying consumer of his or her right to obtain a free annual credit report at

http://www.annualcreditreport.com; and

o Directing consumers to the CFPB Web site for more information about credit

reports and their FCRA rights.

Credit score disclosure exception notices must be in writing and in a form that the

consumers may keep. You must send separate credit score disclosure notices to each

co-borrower, regardless ot whether they reside at the same address.

Credit Score Disclosure Exception for Real Estate-Secured Credit

This exception applies to credit secured by 1 to 4 units of residential real property,

and complements the existing "Notice to Home Loan Applicant," which requires

disclosure of credit score and related information. You must deliver this notice to

the consumer at the same time as the Notice to Home Loan Applicant ("as soon as

reasonably practicable"), but not later than the consummation of a closed-end loan

or the first transaction under an open-end credit plan.

The Bureau has provided a model notice which incorporates the existing "Notice to

Home Loan Applicant" as the third page. Although the notice should be delivered

with the "Notice to Home Loan Applicant," it must be segregated from all other

information provided to the consumer.

Credit Score Disclosure Exception for Non-Mortgage Credit

This exception may be used for all other credit - i.e., credit not secured by 1 to 4 units

of residential real property, but may not be used in connection with an account

review.

The notice must be segregated from all other information provided to the consumer,

and must be delivered "as soon as reasonably practicable", but not later than

consummation of a closed-end loan or the first transaction under an open-end plan.

If you are an auto lender and are "arranging" for the notice to be delivered to the

consumer by the auto dealer, the notice may provide the credit score used by the

auto dealer or by you. The auto dealer is effectively your agent, and can provide a

copy of the notice to you without becoming a consumer reporting agency.

No Score Available Exception

You are not required to Provide a credit score exception notice to a consumer if no

score is available for the consumer - if, for example, the consumer reporting agency

from which you are obtaining credit scores does not have enough information to

generate a score for the consumer.

Where no score is available for a consumer, you must provide a notice with special

content explaining the importance of credit scores and that a credit score was not

available for the individual. This notice must be segregated from other information,

and must be in writing and in a form that the consumer may keep.

The Bureau has a provided a model form notice to provide to consumers for whom

no score is available.


Knowledge Check
You must provide a risk-based pricing notice to a customer if you charge more for insurance based on a consumer report..
False


If you provide an adverse action notice, you are not required to provide a risk-based pricing notice.
True
Adverse Action Not Based on Consumer Report



Adverse Action Not Based on Consumer Report

Adverse action based on information obtained from third parties other

than consumer reporting agencies:

Information obtained from an affiliated third party

Information obtained from a non-affiliated third party

Section 615(b) - FCRA Law


FCRA Law: Section 615(b)

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 615(b): Adverse action based on information obtained from third

parties other than consumer reporting agencies

(b) Adverse action based on information obtained from third parties other than

consumer reporting agencies

(1) In general. Whenever credit for personal, family, or household purposes

involving a consumer is denied or the charge for such credit is increased either

wholly or partly because of information obtained from a person other than a

consumer reporting agency bearing upon the consumer's credit worthiness,

credit standing, credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal

characteristics, or mode of living, the user of such information shall, within a

reasonable period of time, upon the consumer's written request for the reasons

for such adverse action received within sixty days after learning of such adverse

action, disclose the nature of the information to the consumer. The user of such

information shall clearly and accurately disclose to the consumer his right to

make such written request at the time such adverse action is communicated to

the consumer.

(2) Duties of person taking certain actions based on information provided by

affiliate

(A) Duties, generally. If a person takes an action described in subparagraph

(B) with respect to a consumer, based in whole or in part on information

described in subparagraph (C), the person shall-

(i) notify the consumer of the action, including a statement that the

consumer may obtain the information in accordance with clause (ii); and

(ii) upon a written request from the consumer received within 60 days

after transmittal of the notice required by clause (i), disclose to the

consumer the nature of the information upon which the action is based

by not later than 30 days after receipt of the request.

(B) Action described. An action referred to in subparagraph (A) is an adverse

action described in LFCRA S 603(k)(1 taken in connection with a

transaction initiated by the consumer, or any adverse action described in

clause (i) or (ii) of tFCRA S

(C) Information described. Information referred to in subparagraph (A)

(i) except as provided in clause (ii), is information that

(l) is furnished to the person taking the action by a person related by

common ownership or affiliated by common corporate control to the

person taking the action; and

(Il) bears on the credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity,

character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of

living of the consumer; and

(ii) does not include

(l) information solely as to transactions or experiences between the

consumer and the person furnishing the information; or

(Il) information in a consumer report.


Section 615(b) - Explanation

Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 615(b)

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 615(b) - Adverse action based on information obtained from third

parties other than consumer reporting agencies

This section deals with the responsibility of the user when information that is used to

take adverse action is obtained from a source other than a consumer reporting

agency - either an affiliate or a non-affiliated third party.

Information Obtained from a Non-Affiliated Third Party

Section 61 5(b)(1) addresses adverse actions based on information obtained from a

non-affiliated third party source in connection with a consumer credit transaction -

such as information received directly from another bank or lender as a "credit

reference." It is important to note that this provision applies only to credit

transactions for personal, family or household purposes; it does not apply to

commercial credit transactions and does not apply to insurance, employment,

apartment rental and similar non-credit transactions.

When the user informs the consumer that credit is denied or the charge for the

credit is being increased based on this third-party information, the user must notify

the consumer that he or she may make a written request within 60 days to learn the

nature of the information on which the denial or price increase was based. Within a

reasonable period of time after receiving the consumer's written request for the

reason for the adverse action, the user must disclose to the consumer, either orally

or in writing, the nature of the information on which the decision is based. The user

need not disclose the source of the information, but should provide enough facts

about the nature of the information so the consumer may adequately refute or

challenge the accuracy of the item.

Information Obtained from an Affiliated Third Party

As explained prior (refer back to Module 2: "What is Not a Consumer Report"),

certain information that otherwise would be a consumer report is specifically

excluded from the definition of "consumer report" when that information is shared

among affiliated companies - such as companies under common corporate control.

When this information is used to take adverse actions against consumers, special

requirements apply.

As discussed above, information about transactions or experiences that is shared

among affiliated companies in the same corporate family is specifically excluded

from the definition of consumer report. Another exception relates to "other

information" - i.e., information that is not "transaction or experience" information,

such as credit report information received from a consumer reporting agency - that

is communicated among affiliated companies after the consumer has been notified

"that the information may be communicated among such persons and the consumer

is given the opportunity, before the time that the information is initially

communicated, to direct that such information not be communicated among such

persons."

The Section 61 5(b)(2) notice must be given when adverse action is taken based in

whole or in part on information from a corporate affiliate that bears on the credit

worthiness, credit standing, character, general reputation, personal characteristics,

or mode of living of the consumer (and thus could be a consumer report if it were

not specifically excluded from the FCRA).

A notice is only required to be given under this provision in credit, insurance and

employment transactions. Notice is not required in connection with other types of

transactions, such as check-cashing or apartment rental.

The Section 61 5(b)(2) notice must tell the consumer about the adverse action. If,

within 60 days of receiving this notice, the consumer asks in writing for the nature of

the information involved, the person furnishing the notice must comply with that

request within 30 days of receiving the request. This Section does not require that

the consumer be told the source of the information; only the "nature" of the

information must be disclosed to the consumer.

Knowledge Check
You are only required to provide an adverse action notice when you take adverse action against a consumer based on information from a consumer reporting agency.
False

Module 6: Disposal of Information & Data Security


Disposal of Information and Data Security

The module "Disposal of Information and Data Security"

contains the following subsections:

You must access each subsection sequentially. Click on a button below to access each subsection.

Disposal of Information

Data Security

Disposal of Information

Disposal of Information

You are required to securely dispose of

consumer reports and information

derived from consumer reports.


Section 628 & 16 C.F.R. Part 682 - FCRA Law


FCRA Law: Section 628 & 16 C.F.R. Part 682

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 628: Disposal of records

(a) Regulations

(1) In general. The Federal Trade Commission, the Securities and Exchange

Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal banking

agencies, and the National Credit Union Administration, with respect to the

entities that are subject to their respective enforcement authority under section

621, and in coordination as described in paragraph (2), shall issue final

regulations requiring any person that maintains or otherwise possesses

consumer information, or any compilation of consumer information, derived

from consumer reports for a business purpose to properly dispose of any such

information or compilation.

(2) Coordination. Each agency required to prescribe regulations under paragraph

(1) shall-

(A) consult and coordinate with each other such agency so that, to the extent

possible, the regulations prescribed by each such agency are consistent and

comparable with the regulations by each such other agency; and

(B) ensure that such regulations are consistent with the requirements and

regulations issued pursuant to Public Law 106-102 and other provisions of

Federal law.

(3) Exemption authority. In issuing regulations under this section, the agencies

identified in paragraph (1 ), may exempt any person or class of persons from

application of those regulations, as such agency deems appropriate to carry out

the purpose of this section.

(b) Rule of construction. Nothing in this section shall be construed--

(1 ) to require a person to maintain or destroy any record pertaining to a

consumer that is not imposed under other law; or

(2) to alter or affect any requirement imposed under any other provision of law

to maintain or destroy such a record.

16 C.F.R. Part 682 Disposal of consumer report information and records

S 682.1 Definitions.

(a) In general. Except as modified by this part or unless the context otherwise

requires, the terms used in this part have the same meaning as set forth in the Fair

Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.

(b) "Consumer information" means any record about an individual, whether in

paper, electronic, or other form, that is a consumer report or is derived from a

consumer report. Consumer information also means a compilation of such records.

Consumer information does not include information that does not identify

individuals, such as aggregate information or blind data.

(c) "Dispose," "disposing," or "disposal" means:

(1 ) The discarding or abandonment of consumer information, or

(2) The sale, donation, or transfer of any medium, including computer

equipment, upon which consumer information is stored.

S 682.2 Purpose and scope.

(a) Purpose. This part ("rule") implements section 216 of the Fair and Accurate Credit

Transactions Act of 2003, which is designed to reduce the risk of consumer fraud and

related harms, including identity theft, created by improper disposal of consumer

information.

(b) Scope. This rule applies to any person over which the Federal Trade Commission

has jurisdiction, that, for a business purpose, maintains or otherwise possesses

consumer information.

S 682.3 Proper disposal of consumer information.

(a) Standard. Any person who maintains or otherwise possesses consumer

information for a business purpose must properly dispose of such information by

taking reasonable measures to protect against unauthorized access to or use of the

information in connection with its disposal.

(b) Examples. Reasonable measures to protect against unauthorized access to or use

of consumer information in connection with its disposal include the following

examples. These examples are illustrative only and are not exclusive or exhaustive

methods for complying with the rule in this part.

(1) Implementing and monitoring compliance with policies and procedures that

require the burning, pulverizing, or shredding of papers containing consumer

information so that the information cannot practicably be read or reconstructed.

(2) Implementing and monitoring compliance with policies and procedures that

require the destruction or erasure of electronic media containing consumer

information so that the information cannot practicably be read or reconstructed.

(3) After due diligence, entering into and monitoring compliance with a contract

with another party engaged in the business of record destruction to dispose of

material, specifically identified as consumer information, in a manner consistent

with this rule. In this context, due diligence could include reviewing an

independent audit of the disposal company's operations and/or its compliance

with this rule, obtaining information about the disposal company from several

references or other reliable sources, requiring that the disposal company be

certified by a recognized trade association or similar third party, reviewing and

evaluating the disposal company's information security policies or procedures, or

taking other appropriate measures to determine the competency and integrity of

the potential disposal company.

(4) For persons or entities who maintain or otherwise possess consumer

information through their provision of services directly to a person subject to this

part, implementing and monitoring compliance with policies and procedures that

protect against unauthorized or unintentional disposal of consumer information,

and disposing of such information in accordance with examples (b)(l ) and (2) of

this section.

(5) For persons subject to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 15 U.S.C. 6081 et seq., and

the Federal Trade Commission's Standards for Safeguarding Customer

Information, 16 C.F.R. part 314 ("Safeguards Rule"), incorporating the proper

disposal of consumer information as required by this rule into the information

security program required by the Safeguards Rule.

S 682.4 Relation to other laws.

Nothing in the rule in this part shall be construed:

(a) To require a person to maintain or destroy any record pertaining to a consumer

that is not imposed under other law; or

(b) To alter or affect any requirement imposed under any other provision of law to

maintain or destroy such a record.

Section 628.3 Explanation

Explanation of Section 682.3

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Proper disposal of consumer information

FCRA S 628 requires the federal financial regulatory agencies and the Federal Trade

Commission to make a rule requiring anyone who has information "derived from a

consumer report" to properly and securely dispose of that information. In enacting

this provision, Congress was careful to add that persons holding consumer report

information or information derived from consumer reports are not required to

dispose of that information, but, if they choose to dispose of the information, they

must do so properly.

The federal financial regulators for the most part amended their existing data

security rules to require the secure disposal of information derived from consumer

reports. The FTC, however, made a stand-alone rule, which we have reprinted here.

It is similar to the rules made by the other federal regulators, but if you are a bank, a

federally chartered credit union or a securities firm, we would encourage you to

review the disposal rule issued by your functional regulator.

The FTC rule requires that businesses holding "consumer information" - defined as

"any record about an individual, whether in paper, electronic, or other form, that is a

consumer report or is derived from a consumer report" - properly dispose of such

information "by taking reasonable measures to protect against unauthorized access

to or use of the information in connection with its disposal."

The rule specifically provides that "consumer information" does not include

information that does not identify individuals, such as aggregate information or blind

data. The FTC also has emphasized in guidance to industry that businesses are only

required to take "reasonable measures" to protect data. For example, a list of

names with credit report information and scores might be very sensitive and should

be carefully handled, whereas a simple list of names - albeit a list derived from

consumer reports - may be significantly less sensitive, and the measures taken to

adequately protect that information during disposal may not need to be so

extensive.

The rule provides several examples of how a business might comply with the

disposal requirement. For instance, the rule states that businesses should burn,

pulverize, or shred papers containing consumer information and should destroy or

erase electronic media - such as computer hard drives or other storage media-

containing consumer information "so that the information cannot practicably be

read or reconstructed." The rule also suggests hiring a qualified disposal company

and incorporating disposal standards into the company-wide data security program.

Knowledge Check
The FCRA Disposal Rule requires you to dispose of information after three years.
False


Data Security

Data Security

Financial institutions including:

Banks

Finance companies

Mortgage brokers

Insurance companies

Securities firms

are required to establish security programs for consumer data, including

consumer report information.

Safeguard Rule: 16 C.F.R. Part 314

Safeguard Rule: 16 C.F.R. Part 314

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

S 314.1 Purpose and scope

(a) Purpose. This part, which implements sections 501 and 505(b)(2) of the Gramm-

Leach-Bliley Act, sets forth standards for developing, implementing, and maintaining

reasonable administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to protect the security,

confidentiality, and integrity of customer information.

(b) Scope. This part applies to the handling of customer information by all financial

institutions over which the Federal Trade Commission ("FTC" or "Commission") has

jurisdiction. This part refers to such entities as "you." This part applies to all customer
information in your possession, regardless of whether such information pertains to

individuals with whom you have a customer relationship, or pertains to the

customers of other financial institutions that have provided such information to you.

S 314.2 Definitions

(a) In general. Except as modified by this part or unless the context otherwise

requires, the terms used in this part have the same meaning as set forth in the Lrule

governing the Privacy of Consumer Financial Information, 12 C.F.R. part 101 61.

(b) Customer information means any record containing nonpublic personal

information as defined in Ll 2 C.F.R. 101 about a customer of a financial

institution, whether in paper, electronic, or other form, that is handled or maintained

by or on behalf of you or your affiliates.

(c) Information security program means the administrative, technical, or physical

safeguards you use to access, collect, distribute, process, protect, store, use,

transmit, dispose of, or otherwise handle customer information.

(d) Service provider means any person or entity that receives, maintains, processes,

or otherwise is permitted access to customer information through its provision of

services directly to a financial institution that is subject to this part.


S 314.3 Standards for safeguarding customer information

(a) Information security program. You shall develop, implement, and maintain a

comprehensive information security program that is written in one or more readily

accessible parts and contains administrative, technical, and physical safeguards that

are appropriate to your size and complexity, the nature and scope of your activities,

and the sensitivity of any customer information at issue. Such safeguards shall

include the elements set forth in 5314.4 and shall be reasonably designed to achieve

the objectives of this part, as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section.

(b) Objectives. The objectives of section 501 (b) of the Act, and of this part, are to:

(1) Insure the security and confidentiality of customer information;

(2) Protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity

of such information; and

(3) Protect against unauthorized access to or use of such information that could

result in substantial harm or inconvenience to any customer.

S 314.4 Elements

In order to develop, implement, and maintain your information security program,

you shall:

(a) Designate an employee or employees to coordinate your information security

program.

(b) Identify reasonably foreseeable internal and external risks to the security,

confidentiality, and integrity of customer information that could result in the

unauthorized disclosure, misuse, alteration, destruction or other compromise of

such information, and assess the sufficiency of any safeguards in place to control

these risks. At a minimum, such a risk assessment should include consideration of

risks in each relevant area of your operations, including:

(1) Employee training and management;

(2) Information systems, including network and software design, as well as

information processing, storage, transmission and disposal; and

(3) Detecting, preventing and responding to attacks, intrusions, or other systems

failures.

(c) Design and implement information safeguards to control the risks you identify

through risk assessment, and regularly test or otherwise monitor the effectiveness

of the safeguards' key controls, systems, and procedures.

(d) Oversee service providers, by:

(1 ) Taking reasonable steps to select and retain service providers that are

capable of maintaining appropriate safeguards for the customer information at

issue; and

(2) Requiring your service providers by contract to implement and maintain such

safeguards.

(e) Evaluate and adjust your information security program in light of the results of

the testing and monitoring required by paragraph (c) of this section; any material

changes to your operations or business arrangements; or any other circumstances

that you know or have reason to know may have a material impact on your

information security program.

Safeguard Rule Explanation - 314.3 - 314.4


Explanation of 16 C.F.R. 314.3-314.4

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 501 (b) of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, enacted by Congress in 1 999, required

the federal financial regulators and the Federal Trade Commission to "establish

appropriate standards for the financial institutions subject to their jurisdiction

relating to administrative, technical, and physical safeguards - (1) to insure the

security and confidentiality of customer records and information; (2) to protect

against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such records;

and (3) to protect against unauthorized access to or use of such records or

information which could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to any

customer."

The term "financial institution" is defined in this context to include any company that

engages in financial activity, including a bank, credit union, finance company, loan

company, insurance company, securities firm, mortgage broker or auto dealer that

extends or arranges credit. The term even includes companies that provide services

to financial companies, such as debt collectors, data processing companies, and

consumer reporting agencies.

The federal banking agencies, federal securities regulators and state insurance

regulators have all made rules to implement the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act

requirement, referred to generally as "Safeguards Rules" or "Security Guidelines."

There is a great deal of variation in these rules and guidelines - for example, the

bank rules require that consumers be notified in the event of a security breach,

while the securities industry rules do not. These rules all require the safekeeping of

consumer information that was obtained in the context of providing a financial

product or service to a consumer - including consumer report information that is so

obtained. In addition, as mentioned above, the bank agencies and securities

regulators have incorporated the FCRA data disposal requirements into their data

security rules.

We have reprinted the FTC's Safeguards Rule here. It is one of the more

straightforward data security rules, and it provides a representative example of such

a rule as a basis for our discussion. If, however, you are a bank, credit union,

securities firm, or insurance company or agent, we recommend that you review the

Safeguards Rule issued by your functional regulator.

The FTC Safeguards Rule requires financial institutions under the FTCs jurisdiction,

such as non-bank lenders, debt collectors and mortgage brokers, to develop,

implement, and maintain a written information security program. Although the rule,

by its terms, applies only to the safekeeping of "customer data," the FTC has made

clear that any information about a customer of a financial institution must be

protected - even if the person is not your customer.

The written information security program must contain administrative, technical,

and physical safeguards for the consumer data handled by the financial institution -

this means not just protection against computer compromises, but even more

mundane "physical" safeguards, such as locks on the file cabinet, and

"administrative" safeguards, such as a clean-desk policy. And these safeguards must

be appropriate to the financial institution's size and complexity, meaning that a one-

size-fits-all approach will not comply - a 500-employee finance company should not

have the same program as a one-person mortgage broker.

The FTC rule requires financial institutions to undertake a risk assessment to

determine the threats to consumer data within the organization. More specifically,

the rule requires financial institutions to "Lildentify reasonably foreseeable internal

and external risks to the security, confidentiality, and integrity of customer

information that could result in the unauthorized disclosure, misuse, alteration,

destruction or other compromise of such information." The financial institution

must then "assess the sufficiency of any safeguards in place to control these risks,"

including management of employees, management of information systems,

management of service providers, and systems in place to detect and prevent

unauthorized intrusions and access to data.

Finally, the FTC Safeguards Rule requires the financial institution to designate an

employee to coordinate the information security program, to test and monitor the

program's effectiveness, and to evaluate and adjust the program in response to the

testing and monitoring, as well as in response to changes in the company's

operations or business activities.

Knowledge Check
The FTC’s Safeguards Rule only addresses the security of data stored on electronic media, such as computer hard drives.
False
Module 7: Medical Information

Limitations of Use

The FCRA Restricts:

a consumer reporting agency's ability to

include information relating to medical

care in a consumer report.

your ability to use medical information

that is received in a consumer report.

The circumstances under which

nationwide consumer reporting agencies

can report veteran's medical debt

Section 603(i) & 604(g) - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Section 603(i) and 604(g)

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(i) - Definition of medical information

The term "medical information" -

(1 ) means information or data, whether oral or recorded, in any form or medium,

created by or derived from a health care provider or the consumer, that relates

to--

(A) the past, present, or future physical, mental, or behavioral health or

condition of an individual;

(B) the provision of health care to an individual; or

(C) the payment for the provision of health care to an individual.

(2) does not include the age or gender of a consumer, demographic information

about the consumer, including a consumer's residence address or e-mail

address, or any other information about a consumer that does not relate to the

physical, mental, or behavioral health or condition of a consumer, including the

existence or value of any insurance policy.

Section 604(g) Protection of medical information

(1 ) Limitation on consumer reporting agencies

A consumer reporting agency shall not furnish for employment purposes, or in

connection with a credit or insurance transaction, a consumer report that

contains medical information (other than medical contact information treated in

the manner required under section 605(a)(6) of this title) about a consumer,

unless-

(A) if furnished in connection with an insurance transaction, the consumer

affirmatively consents to the furnishing of the report;

(B) if furnished for employment purposes or in connection with a credit

transaction-

(i) the information to be furnished is relevant to process or effect the

employment or credit transaction; and

(ii) the consumer provides specific written consent for the furnishing of

the report that describes in clear and conspicuous language the use for

which the information will be furnished; or

(C) the information to be furnished pertains solely to transactions, accounts,

or balances relating to debts arising from the receipt of medical services,

products, or devises* where such information, other than account status or

amounts, is restricted or reported using codes that do not identify, or do not

provide information sufficient to infer, the specific provider or the nature of

such services, products, or devices, as provided in section 605(a)(6) of this

title.

(2) Limitation on creditors. Except as permitted pursuant to paragraph (3)(C) or

regulations prescribed under paragraph (5)(A), a creditor shall not obtain or use

medical information (other than medical information treated in the manner

required under section 605(a)(6)) pertaining to a consumer in connection with

any determination of the consumer's eligibility, or continued eligibility, for credit.

* * * Intervening Text * * *

(4) Limitation on re-disclosure of medical information. Any person that receives

medical information pursuant to paragraph (1) ... shall not disclose such

information to any other person, except as necessary to carry out the purpose

for which the information was initially disclosed, or as otherwise permitted by

statute, regulation, or order.

-k * * Text Omitted* * *

Section 605(a) Information excluded from consumer reports.

(a) ... LNJo consumer reporting agency may make any consumer report containing

any of the following items of information:

* ** Intervening Text * * *

(6) The name, address, and telephone number of any medical information

furnisher that has notified the agency of its status, unless-

(A) such name, address, and telephone number are restricted or reported

using codes that do not identify, or provide information sufficient to infer, the

specific provider or the nature of such services, products, or devices to a

person other than the consumer; or

(B) the report is being provided to an insurance company for a purpose

relating to engaging in the business of insurance other than property and

casualty insurance.

-k * * Text Omitted* * *

Section 623(a)(9) Duty to provide notice of status as medical information

furnisher.

A person whose primary business is providing medical services, products, or devices,

or the person's agent or assignee, who furnishes information to a consumer

reporting agency on a consumer shall be considered a medical information furnisher

for purposes of this title, and shall notify the agency of such status.

Section 604(g) - Explanation

Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 604(g)

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 604(g) - Medical information

The FCRA defines the term "medical information" very broadly, as any information

relating to "the past, present, or future physical, mental, or behavioral health or

condition of an individual." (The term does not include basic information such as

gender and age, or similar demographic information.)

The FCRA imposes restrictions on the ability of consumer reporting agencies to

report medical information, and also imposes requirements on users of consumer

reports and other persons who receive such information from consumer reporting

agencies.

A consumer report issued by a consumer reporting agency for employment

purposes or in connection with a credit or insurance transaction, may not contain

medical information about the consumer, unless the consumer consents to

furnishing that report.

In addition, a consumer reporting agency must "mask" or "code" in consumer

reports information that they receive from "medical information furnishers" - i.e.,

medical providers, and their agents and assignees (e.g., persons who purchase

medical debts) that provide or "furnish" information to the consumer reporting

agency. This means that the consumer reporting agency may only report the name,

address, and telephone number of a medical information furnisher if such contact

information is reported "using codes that do not identify, or provide information

sufficient to infer, the specific provider or the nature of such services, products, or

devices to a person other than the consumer." (To enable the consumer reporting

agency to easily identify medical information furnishers, the FCRA requires medical

providers and their agents and assignees to notify the consumer reporting agency of

their status as a medical information furnisher.)

There is an exception to the coding requirement that allows consumer reporting

agencies to report uncoded medical information to life or health insurers, but the

exception does not apply to property and casualty insurers - such as auto and home

insurers. In addition, consumer reporting agencies are permitted to report the

status of medical accounts (e.g., "paid as agreed," "30 days late"), as well as the

amounts owed and the required monthly payment.

Restrictions on Persons Who Obtain Medical Information from a Consumer Reporting

Agency

There also are requirements imposed on the users of consumer reports who receive

medical information. Specifically, any person that receives medical information from

a consumer reporting agency "shall not disclose such information to any other

person, except as necessary to carry out the purpose for which the information was

initially disclosed, or as otherwise permitted by statute, regulation, or order."

Unfortunately, the wording here is a little imprecise, and it is not clear whether this

prohibition on re-disclosure also applies to information that has been coded by the

consumer reporting agency to prevent the user from "inferring the specific

medical provider or the nature of such medical services, products, or devices."

Because the FCRA's definition of "medical information" is so broad, however,

persons who receive consumer reports containing information that they believe to

be medical in nature should treat the information as particularly sensitive, and
should not disclose it to others except when necessary.

The purpose of these requirements is to protect consumers' privacy, and to prevent

creditors, insurers, employers and others from making decisions based on a

consumer's medical condition. Congress believed that if consumer report users

could see that consumers had accumulated substantial medical debts, they might

not be willing to give them credit, insurance or a job. On the other hand, Congress

recognized that lenders and others need to know the amount of a consumer's debt,

because a consumer's other debts affect their creditworthiness and their ability to

repay new obligations. As a result, Congress allowed medical debts to be included in

consumer reports, but decreed that their medical nature should be masked from the

view of credit report users.

We note that providers of healthcare and related services may be subject to

additional limitations on the disclosure of health information under state or federal

law. For example, the federal Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable

Health Information published by the Department of Health and Human Services

under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ("HIPAA") may impose

additional restrictions on health care providers and persons, such as debt collectors,

that provide services to healthcare providers. See 45 C.F.R. Part 164.

Knowledge Check
Under the FCRA, the term ‘medical information’ is defined to include demographic information, such as gender and age.
FALSE
Module 8: Notice of Address Discrepancy

Duties of Users of Consumer Reports

The FCRA imposes requirements

on users of consumer reports

who receive a notice of address

discrepancy from a consumer

reporting agency.

Section 605(h) - FCRA Law
16 C.F.R. Section 1022.82

16 C.F.R. Section 1022.82

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

FCRA Section 605(h): Notice of discrepancy in address

(1) In general

If a person has requested a consumer report relating to a consumer from a

consumer reporting agency described in LFCRA S the request

includes an address for the consumer that substantially differs from the

addresses in the file of the consumer, and the agency provides a consumer

report in response to the request, the consumer reporting agency shall

notify the requester of the existence of the discrepancy.

(2) Regulations

(A) Regulations required

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau), shall, in consultation with

the National Credit Union Administration, and the Commission

prescribe regulations providing guidance regarding reasonable policies

and procedures that a user of a consumer report should employ when

such user has received a notice of discrepancy under paragraph (1).

(B) Policies and procedures to be included

The regulations prescribed under subparagraph (A) shall describe

reasonable policies and procedures for use by a user of a consumer

report-

(i) to form a reasonable belief that the user knows the identity of the

person to whom the consumer report pertains; and

(ii) if the user establishes a continuing relationship with the

consumer, and the user regularly and in the ordinary course of

business furnishes information to the consumer reporting agency

from which the notice of discrepancy pertaining to the consumer

was obtained, to reconcile the address of the consumer with the

consumer reporting agency by furnishing such address to such

consumer reporting agency as part of information regularly

furnished by the user for the period in which the relationship is

established.

12 C.F.R. Section 1022.82: Duties of users of consumer reports regarding

address discrepancies

(a) Scope. This section applies to a user of consumer reports (user) that receives

a notice of address discrepancy from a consumer reporting agency described in

1 5 U.S.C. 1 681 a(p), except for a person excluded from coverage of this part by

section 1029 of the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 201 0, Title X of the

Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Public Law 1 11-

203, 124 Stat. 137.

(b) Definition. For purposes of this section, a notice of address discrepancy

means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency described in

LFCRA S pursuant to CFCRA S 605(h)(1 that informs the user of a

substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user

provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's

file for the consumer.

(c) Reasonable belief. (1 ) Requirement to form a reasonable belief. A user must

develop and implement reasonable policies and procedures designed to enable

the user to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the

consumer about whom it has requested the report, when the user receives a

notice of address discrepancy.

(2) Examples of reasonable policies and procedures. (i) Comparing the

information in the consumer report provided by the consumer reporting

agency with information the user:

(A) Obtains and uses to verify the consumer's identity in accordance with

the requirements of the Customer Identification Program (CIP) rules

implementing 31 U.S.C. 53180) (31 C.F.R. 1020.220);

(B) Maintains in its own records, such as applications, change of address

notifications, other customer account records, or retained CIP

documentation; or

(C) Obtains from third-party sources; or

(ii) Verifying the information in the consumer report provided by the

consumer reporting agency with the consumer.

(d) Consumer's address. (1 ) Requirement to furnish consumer's address to a

consumer reporting agency. A user must develop and implement reasonable

policies and procedures for furnishing an address for the consumer that the

user has reasonably confirmed is accurate to the consumer reporting agency

described in LFCRA S from whom it received the notice of address

discrepancy when the user:

(i) Can form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to

the consumer about whom the user requested the report;

(ii) Establishes a continuing relationship with the consumer; and

(iii) Regularly and in the ordinary course of business furnishes

information to the consumer reporting agency from which the notice

of address discrepancy relating to the consumer was obtained.

(2) Examples of confirmation methods. The user may reasonably confirm an

address is accurate by:

(i) Verifying the address with the consumer about whom it has

requested the report;

(ii) Reviewing its own records to verify the address of the consumer;

(iii) Verifying the address through third-party sources; or

(iv) Using other reasonable means.

(3) Timing. The policies and procedures developed in accordance with

paragraph (d)(l ) of this section must provide that the user will furnish the

consumer's address that the user has reasonably confirmed is accurate to

the consumer reporting agency described in tFCRA 5 as part of the

information it regularly furnishes for the reporting period in which it

establishes a relationship with the consumer.

Section 605(h) - Explanation
16 C.F.R. Section 1022.82 - Duties of users of consumer reports regarding address discrepancies


Explanation of 12 C.F.R. Section 1022.82

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

12 C.F.R. Section 1022.82 - Duties of users of consumer reports regarding

address discrepancies

Section 605(h) of the FCRA requires the nationwide consumer reporting agencies

- such as Equifax, Experian and TransUnion - to notify a user of a consumer

report if the address for the consumer that the user provided with its request for

the report "substantially differs from the addresses in the file of the consumer"

at the consumer reporting agency. This notice is sometimes referred to as an

"Address Discrepancy Indicator" or "ADI."

We will illustrate the application of this requirement using, as an example, a

lender that obtains a consumer report containing an ADI, but we note that these

requirements apply to all users of consumer reports, including employers,

insurers and landlords.

Example of Application of ADI Requirements

As an example, if a lender requested a consumer report from Equifax, Experian

or TransUnion and provided the subject consumer's name and address, and the

address(es) that the consumer reporting agency had in its file for the consumer

"substantially differed" from the address provided by the lender (for example,

the lender-supplied address does not appear on the file), the consumer

a reporting agency would be required to provide the lender with an ADI.

The lender would then be required to have procedures in place to "form a

reasonable belief" that the consumer report obtained from the consumer

reporting agency relates to the subject consumer. These procedures might

require the lender to compare information in the consumer report with

information that the lender obtains directly from the consumer, maintains in the

lender's own files or records, or obtains from a third party source - e.g., as a part

of the lender's "customer identification program" under the USA-PATRIOT Act.

As an example, the lender might ask the consumer for his or her Social Security

number, and then compare that number with the Social Security number listed

in the consumer report. The lender also might confirm that it obtained the

correct consumer report by verifying the information in the consumer report

with the consumer directly - for example, by asking the consumer the name of

his or her mortgage company or asking the consumer for information about his

or her prior addresses.

Where the lender cannot "form a reasonable belief" that the consumer report

relates to the subject consumer, the federal banking agencies and the Federal

Trade Commission have said that the lender should not use the consumer

report. The agencies also have said that an address discrepancy could be a "red

flag" - i.e., a possible indicator of identity theft - and lenders and others may

want to consider whether to incorporate ADIs into their identity theft prevention

programs. The agencies have explained, however, that the primary purpose of

the rule is not the prevention of identity theft or similar types of fraud, but,

rather, consumer report accuracy. That is, the rule is intended to insure that

companies that use consumer reports to make decisions about consumers have

obtained consumer reports relating to the proper consumer. Using consumer

reports relating to the wrong consumer can result in consumers being denied, or

paying too much for, important products and services, such as credit and

insurance. In extreme circumstances, using the wrong consumer report might

even result in an individual erroneously being rejected for employment.

Knowledge Check
When you receive an address discrepancy indicator in connection with a credit application, you must deny the loan.
FALSE
Module 9: Fraud Alert Duties for Lenders & Security Freezes

Fraud and Active Duty Alerts

The FCRA provides for the three types of fraud alerts:

Initial alerts

Extended alerts

Active duty alerts

The FCRA also establishes a federal security freeze, with special rules for

'protected consumers"

Section 605A - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Section 605A

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

FCRA Section 605A: Identity Theft Prevention; Fraud Alerts And Active

Duty Alerts

(a) One-call fraud alerts

(1) Initial alerts. Upon the direct request of a consumer, or an individual

acting on behalf of or as a personal representative of a consumer, who

asserts in good faith a suspicion that the consumer has been or is about to

become a victim of fraud or related crime, including identity theft, a

consumer reporting agency described in section 603(p) that maintains a file

on the consumer and has received appropriate proof of the identity of the

requester shall-

(A) include a fraud alert in the file of that consumer, and also provide that

alert along with any credit score generated in using that file, for a period

of not less than 1 year, beginning on the date of such request, unless the

consumer or such representative requests that such fraud alert be

removed before the end of such period, and the agency has received

appropriate proof of the identity of the requester for such purpose; and

(B) refer the information regarding the fraud alert under this paragraph

to each of the other consumer reporting agencies described in section

603(p), in accordance with procedures developed under section 621 (f).

(2) Access to free reports. In any case in which a consumer reporting agency

includes a fraud alert in the file of a consumer pursuant to this subsection,

the consumer reporting agency shall-

(A) disclose to the consumer that the consumer may request a free copy

of the file of the consumer pursuant to section 61 2(d); and

(B) provide to the consumer all disclosures required to be made under

section 609, without charge to the consumer, not later than 3 business

days after any request described in subparagraph (A).

(b)

Extended alerts

(1) In general. Upon the direct request of a consumer, or an individual acting

on behalf of or as a personal representative of a consumer, who submits an

identity theft report to a consumer reporting agency described in section

603(p) that maintains a file on the consumer, if the agency has received

appropriate proof of the identity of the requester, the agency shall-

(A) include a fraud alert in the file of that consumer, and also provide that

alert along with any credit score generated in using that file, during the 7-

year period beginning on the date of such request, unless the consumer

or such representative requests that such fraud alert be removed before

the end of such period and the agency has received appropriate proof of

the identity of the requester for such purpose;

(B) during the 5-year period beginning on the date of such request,

exclude the consumer from any list of consumers prepared by the

consumer reporting agency and provided to any third party to offer

credit or insurance to the consumer as part of a transaction that was not

initiated by the consumer, unless the consumer or such representative

requests that such exclusion be rescinded before the end of such period;

and

(C) refer the information regarding the extended fraud alert under this

paragraph to each of the other consumer reporting agencies described in

section 603(p), in accordance with procedures developed under section

621

(2) Access to free reports. In any case in which a consumer reporting agency

includes a fraud alert in the file of a consumer pursuant to this subsection,

the consumer reporting agency shall

(A) disclose to the consumer that the consumer may request 2 free

copies of the file of the consumer pursuant to section 61 2(d) during the

12-month period beginning on the date on which the fraud alert was

included in the file; and

(B) provide to the consumer all disclosures required to be made under

section 609, without charge to the consumer, not later than 3 business

days after any request described in subparagraph (A).

(c) Active duty alerts

Upon the direct request of an active duty military consumer, or an individual

acting on behalf of or as a personal representative of an active duty military

consumer, a consumer reporting agency described in section 603(p) that

maintains a file on the active duty military consumer and has received

appropriate proof of the identity of the requester shall-

(1 ) include an active duty alert in the file of that active duty military

consumer, and also provide that alert along with any credit score generated

in using that file, during a period of not less than 12 months, or such longer

period as the LConsumer Financial Protection Bureau) shall determine, by

regulation, beginning on the date of the request, unless the active duty

military consumer or such representative requests that such fraud alert be

removed before the end ot such period, and the agency has received

appropriate proof of the identity of the requester for such purpose;

(2) during the 2-year period beginning on the date of such request, exclude

the active duty military consumer from any list of consumers prepared by

the consumer reporting agency and provided to any third party to offer

credit or insurance to the consumer as part of a transaction that was not

initiated by the consumer, unless the consumer requests that such exclusion

be rescinded before the end of such period; and

(3) refer the information regarding the active duty alert to each of the other

consumer reporting agencies described in section 603(p), in accordance with

procedures developed under section 621 (f).

(d) Procedures

Each consumer reporting agency described in section 603(p) shall establish

policies and procedures to comply with this section, including procedures that

inform consumers of the availability of initial, extended, and active duty alerts

and procedures that allow consumers and active duty military consumers to

request initial, extended, or active duty alerts (as applicable) in a simple and

easy manner, including by telephone.

(e) Referrals of alerts

Each consumer reporting agency described in section 603(p) that receives a

referral of a fraud alert or active duty alert from another consumer reporting

agency pursuant to this section shall, as though the agency received the request

from the consumer directly, follow the procedures required under-

(1) paragraphs (1 )(A) and (2) of subsection (a), in the case of a referral under

subsection (a)(l )(B);

(2) paragraphs (1 )(A), (1 )(B), and (2) of subsection (b), in the case of a referral

under subsection (b)(l )(C); and

(3) paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (c), in the case of a referral under

subsection (c)(3).

(f) Duty of reseller to reconvey alert

A reseller shall include in its report any fraud alert or active duty alert placed in

the file of a consumer pursuant to this section by another consumer reporting

agency.

(g) Duty of other consumer reporting agencies to provide contact

information

If a consumer contacts any consumer reporting agency that is not described in

section 603(p) to communicate a suspicion that the consumer has been or is

about to become a victim of fraud or related crime, including identity theft, the

agency shall provide information to the consumer on how to contact the

Commission and the consumer reporting agencies described in section 603(p)

to obtain more detailed information and request alerts under this section.

(h) Limitations on use of information for credit extensions

(1 ) Requirements for initial and active duty alerts.

(A) Notification. Each initial fraud alert and active duty alert under this

section shall include information that notifies all prospective users of a

consumer report on the consumer to which the alert relates that the

consumer does not authorize the establishment of any new credit plan

or extension of credit, other than under an open-end credit plan (as

defined in section 103(i) Lofthe Truth in Lending Act, now defined in

section 1030), effective July 21, 2011 J), in the name of the consumer, or

issuance of an additional card on an existing credit account requested by

a consumer, or any increase in credit limit on an existing credit account

requested by a consumer, except in accordance with subparagraph (B).

(B) Limitation on Users.

(i) In general. No prospective user of a consumer report that includes

an initial fraud alert or an active duty alert in accordance with this

section may establish a new credit plan or extension of credit, other

than under an open-end credit plan (as defined in section 1 03(i) Lof

the Truth in Lending Act, now defined in section 1030), effective July

21, 201 1 J), in the name of the consumer, or issue an additional card

on an existing credit account requested by a consumer, or grant any

increase in credit limit on an existing credit account requested by a

consumer, unless the user utilizes reasonable policies and procedures

to form a reasonable belief that the user knows the identity of the

person making the request.

(ii) Verification. If a consumer requesting the alert has specified a

telephone number to be used for identity verification purposes,

before authorizing any new credit plan or extension described in

clause (i) in the name of such consumer, a user of such consumer

report shall contact the consumer using that telephone number or

take reasonable steps to verify the consumer's identity and confirm

that the application for a new credit plan is not the result of identity

theft.

(2) Requirements for Extended Alerts

(A) Notification. Each extended alert under this section shall include

information that provides all prospective users of a consumer report

relating to a consumer with:

(i) notification that the consumer does not authorize the

establishment of any new credit plan or extension of credit described

in clause (i), other than under an open-end credit plan (as defined in

section 1 03(i) Lofthe Truth in Lending Act, now defined in section

1 030), effective July 21, 2011 J), in the name of the consumer, or

issuance of an additional card on an existing credit account requested

by a consumer, or any increase in credit limit on an existing credit

account requested by a consumer, except in accordance with

subparagraph (B); and

(ii) a telephone number or other reasonable contact method

designated by the consumer.

(B) Limitation on users. No prospective user of a consumer report or of a

credit score generated using the information in the file of a consumer

that includes an extended fraud alert in accordance with this section may

establish a new credit plan or extension of credit, other than under an

open-end credit plan (as defined in section 1 03(i) Lof the Truth in Lending

Act, now defined in section 1 030), effective July 21, 201 11), in the name of

the consumer, or issue an additional card on an existing credit account

requested by a consumer, or any increase in credit limit on an existing

credit account requested by a consumer, unless the user contacts the

consumer in person or using the contact method described in

subparagraph (A)(ii) to confirm that the application for a new credit plan

or increase in credit limit, or request for an additional card is not the

result of identity theft.

(i) National security freeze.—

(1 ) Definitions.—For purposes of this subsection:

(A) The term 'consumer reporting agency' means a consumer reporting

agency described in section 603(p).

(B) The term 'proper identification' has the meaning of such term as used

under section 610.

(C) The term 'security freeze' means a restriction that prohibits a

consumer reporting agency from disclosing the contents of a consumer

report that is subject to such security freeze to any person requesting the

consumer report.

(2) Placement of security freeze.—

(A) In general.—Upon receiving a direct request from a consumer that a

consumer reporting agency place a security freeze, and upon receiving

proper identification from the consumer, the consumer reporting agency

shall, free of charge, place the security freeze not later than—

(i) in the case of a request that is by toll-free telephone or secure

electronic means, 1 business day after receiving the request directly

from the consumer; or

(ii) in the case of a request that is by mail, 3 business days after

receiving the request directly from the consumer.

(B) Confirmation and additional information.— Not later than 5 business

days after placing a security freeze under subparagraph (A), a consumer

reporting agency shall—

(i) send confirmation of the placement to the consumer; and

(ii) inform the consumer of—

(l) the process by which the consumer may remove the security

freeze, including a mechanism to authenticate the consumer; and

(Il) the consumer's right described in section 61 5(d)(1 )(D).

(C) Notice to third parties.—A consumer reporting agency may advise a

third party that a security freeze has been placed with respect to a

consumer under subparagraph (A).

(3) Removal of security freeze.—

(A) In general.—A consumer reporting agency shall remove a security

freeze placed on the consumer report of a consumer only in the

following cases:

(i) Upon the direct request of the consumer.

(ii) The security freeze was placed due to a material

misrepresentation of fact by the consumer.

(B) Notice if removal not by request

.—lf a consumer reporting agency

removes a security freeze under subparagraph (A)(ii), the consumer

reporting agency shall notify the consumer in writing prior to removing

the security freeze.

(C) Removal of security freeze by consumer request.—Except as provided

in subparagraph (A)(ii), a security freeze shall remain in place until the

consumer directly requests that the security freeze be removed. Upon

receiving a direct request from a consumer that a consumer reporting

agency remove a security freeze, and upon receiving proper

identification from the consumer, the consumer reporting agency shall,

free of charge, remove the security freeze not later than—

(i) in the case of a request that is by toll-free telephone or secure

electronic means, 1 hour after receiving the request for removal; or

(ii) in the case of a request that is by mail, 3 business days after

receiving the request for removal.

(D) Third-party requests.

—If a third party requests access to a consumer

report of a consumer with respect to which a security freeze is in effect,

where such request is in connection with an application for credit, and

the consumer does not allow such consumer report to be accessed, the

third party may treat the application as incomplete.

(E) Temporary removal of security freeze.—Upon receiving a direct

request from a consumer under subparagraph (A)(i), if the consumer

requests a temporary removal of a security freeze, the consumer

reporting agency shall, in accordance with subparagraph (C), remove the

security freeze for the period of time specified by the consumer.

(4) Exceptions.—A security freeze shall not apply to the making of a

consumer report for use of the following:

(A) A person or entity, or a subsidiary, affiliate, or agent of that person or

entity, or an assignee of a financial obligation owed by the consumer to

that person or entity, or a prospective assignee of a financial obligation

owed by the consumer to that person or entity in conjunction with the

proposed purchase of the financial obligation, with which the consumer

has or had prior to assignment an account or contract including a

demand deposit account, or to whom the consumer issued a negotiable

instrument, for the purposes of reviewing the account or collecting the

financial obligation owed for the account, contract, or negotiable

instrument. For purposes of this subparagraph, 'reviewing the account'

includes activities related to account maintenance, monitoring, credit line

increases, and account upgrades and enhancements.

(B) Any Federal, State, or local agency, law enforcement agency, trial

court, or private collection agency acting pursuant to a court order,

warrant, or subpoena.

(C) A child support agency acting pursuant to part D of title IV of the

Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).

(D) A Federal agency or a State or its agents or assigns acting to

investigate fraud or acting to investigate or collect delinquent taxes or

unpaid court orders or to fulfill any of its other statutory responsibilities,

provided such responsibilities are consistent with a permissible purpose

under section 604.

(E) By a person using credit information for the purposes described under

section 604(c).

(F) Any person or entity administering a credit file monitoring

subscription or similar service to which the consumer has subscribed.

(G) Any person or entity for the purpose of providing a consumer with a

copy of the consumer's consumer report or credit score, upon the

request of the consumer.

(H) Any person using the information in connection with the underwriting

of insurance.

(l) Any person using the information for employment, tenant, or

background screening purposes.

0) Any person using the information for assessing, verifying, or

authenticating a consumer's identity for purposes other than the

granting of credit, or for investigating or preventing actual or potential

fraud.

(5) Notice of rights.—At any time a consumer is required to receive a

summary of rights required under section 609, the following notice shall be

included:

CONSUMERS HAVE THE RIGHT TO OBTAIN A SECURITY FREEZE

You have a right to place a "security freeze" on your credit report, which will

prohibit a consumer reporting agency from releasing information in your credit

report without your express authorization. The security freeze is designed to

prevent credit, loans, and services from being approved in your name without

your consent. However, you should be aware that using a security freeze to

take control over who gets access to the personal and financial information in

your credit report may delay, interfere with, or prohibit the timely approval of

any subsequent request or application you make regarding a new loan, credit,

mortgage, or any other account involving the extension of credit.

As an alternative to a security freeze, you have the right to place an initial or

extended fraud alert on your credit file at no cost. An initial fraud alert is a 1-

year alert that is placed on a consumer's credit file. Upon seeing a fraud alert

display on a consumer's credit file, a business is required to take steps to verify

the consumer's identity before extending new credit. If you are a victim of

identity theft, you are entitled to an extended fraud alert, which is a fraud alert

lasting 7 years.

A security freeze does not apply to a person or entity, or its affiliates, or

collection agencies acting on behalf of the person or entity, with which you have

an existing account that requests information in your credit report for the

purposes of reviewing or collecting the account. Reviewing the account includes

activities related to account maintenance, monitoring, credit line increases, and

account upgrades and enhancements.

(6) Webpage.—

(A) Consumer reporting agencies.—A consumer reporting agency shall

establish a webpage that—

(i) allows a consumer to request a security freeze;

(ii) allows a consumer to request an initial fraud alert;

(iii) allows a consumer to request an extended fraud alert;

(iv) allows a consumer to request an active duty fraud alert;

(v) allows a consumer to opt-out of the use of information in a

consumer report to send the consumer a solicitation of credit or

insurance, in accordance with section 61 5(d); and

(vi) shall not be the only mechanism by which a consumer may

request a security freeze.

(B) FTC.—The Federal Trade Commission shall establish a single webpage

that includes a link to each webpage established under subparagraph (A)

within the Federal Trade Commission's website www.ldentitytheft.gov, or

a successor website.

(j) National protection for files and credit records of protected

consumers.—

(1) Definitions.—As used in this subsection:

(A) The term 'consumer reporting agency' means a consumer reporting

agency described in section 603(p).

(B) The term 'protected consumer' means an individual who is—

(i) under the age of 16 years at the time a request for the placement

of a security freeze is made; or

(ii) an incapacitated person or a protected person for whom a

guardian or conservator has been appointed.

(C) The term 'protected consumer's representative' means a person who

provides to a consumer reporting agency sufficient proof of authority to

act on behalf of a protected consumer.

(D) The term 'record' means a compilation of information that—

(i) identifies a protected consumer;

(ii) is created by a consumer reporting agency solely for the purpose

of complying with this subsection; and

(iii) may not be created or used to consider the protected consumer's

credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character, general

reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living.

(E) The term 'security freeze' means a restriction that prohibits a

consumer reporting agency from disclosing the contents of a consumer

report that is the subject of such security freeze or, in the case of a

protected consumer for whom the consumer reporting agency does not

have a file, a record that is subject to such security freeze to any person

requesting the consumer report for the purpose of opening a new

account involving the extension of credit.

(F) The term 'sufficient proof of authority' means documentation that

shows a protected consumer's representative has authority to act on

behalf of a protected consumer and includes—

(i) an order issued by a court of law;

(ii) a lawfully executed and valid power of attorney;

(iii) a document issued by a Federal, State, or local government

agency in the United States showing proof of parentage, including a

birth certificate; or

(iv) with respect to a protected consumer who has been placed in a

foster care setting, a written communication from a county welfare

department or its agent or designee, or a county probation

department or its agent or designee, certifying that the protected

consumer is in a foster care setting under its jurisdiction.

(G) The term 'sufficient proof of identification' means information or

documentation that identifies a protected consumer and a protected

consumer's representative and includes—

(i) a social security number or a copy of a social security card issued by

the Social Security Administration;

(ii) a certified or official copy of a birth certificate issued by the entity

authorized to issue the birth certificate; or

(iii) a copy of a driver's license, an identification card issued by the

motor vehicle administration, or any other government issued

identification.

(2) Placement of security freeze for a protected consumer.—

(A) In general.—Upon receiving a direct request from a protected

consumer's representative that a consumer reporting agency place a

security freeze, and upon receiving sufficient proof of identification and

sufficient proof of authority, the consumer reporting agency shall, free of

charge, place the security freeze not later than—

(i) in the case of a request that is by toll-free telephone or secure

electronic means, 1 business day after receiving the request directly

from the protected consumer's representative; or

(ii) in the case of a request that is by mail, 3 business days after

receiving the request directly from the protected consumer's

representative.

(B) Confirmation and additional information.— Not later than 5 business

days after placing a security freeze under subparagraph (A), a consumer

reporting agency shall—

(i) send confirmation of the placement to the protected consumer's

representative; and

(ii) inform the protected consumer's representative of the process by

which the protected consumer mav remove the security freeze.

including a mechanism to authenticate the protected consumer's

representative.

(C) Creation of file.—lf a consumer reporting agency does not have a file

pertaining to a protected consumer when the consumer reporting

agency receives a direct request under subparagraph (A), the consumer

reporting agency shall create a record for the protected consumer.

(3) Prohibition on release of record or file of protected consumer.—After a

security freeze has been placed under paragraph (2)(A), and unless the

security freeze is removed in accordance with this subsection, a consumer

reporting agency may not release the protected consumer's consumer

report, or any record created for the protected consumer.

(4) Removal of a protected consumer security freeze.—

(A) In general.—A consumer reporting agency shall remove a security

freeze placed on the consumer report of a protected consumer only in

the following cases:

(i) Upon the direct request of the protected consumer's

representative. '

(ii) Upon the direct request of the protected consumer, if the

protected consumer is not under the age of 1 6 years at the time of

the request.

(iii) The security freeze was placed due to a material

misrepresentation of fact by the protected consumer's

representative.

(B) Notice if removal not by request.

—If a consumer reporting agency

removes a security freeze under subparagraph (A)(iii), the consumer

reporting agency shall notify the protected consumer's representative in

writing prior to removing the security freeze.

(C) Removal of freeze by request.—Except as provided in subparagraph

(A)(iii), a security freeze shall remain in place until a protected consumer's

representative or protected consumer described in subparagraph (A)(ii)

directly requests that the security freeze be removed. Upon receiving a

direct request from the protected consumer's representative or

protected consumer described in subparagraph (A)(ii) that a consumer

reporting agency remove a security freeze, and upon receiving sufficient

proof of identification and sufficient proof of authority, the consumer

reporting agency shall, free of charge, remove the security freeze not

later than—

(i) in the case of a request that is by toll-free telephone or secure

electronic means, 1 hour after receiving the request for removal; or

(ii) in the case of a request that is by mail, 3 business days after

receiving the request for removal.

(D) Temporary removal of security freeze.—Upon receiving a direct

request from a protected consumer or a protected consumer's

representative under subparagraph (A)(i), if the protected consumer or

protected consumer's representative requests a temporary removal of a

security freeze, the consumer reporting agency shall, in accordance with

subparagraph (C), remove the security freeze for the period of time

specified by the protected consumer or protected consumer's

representative.

12 C.F.R. S 1022.121 Duration of active duty alerts.

The duration of an active duty alert shall be twelve months.

Section 605A - Explanation
Identity Theft Prevention; Fraud Alerts and Active Duty Alerts

Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 605A

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 605A - Identity Theft Prevention; Fraud Alerts And Active Duty

Alerts

A "fraud alert" is a message that a consumer can place in his or her consumer

report warning businesses that obtain the consumer report not to open an

account in the consumer's name without undertaking additional due diligence.

The FCRA requires the "nationwide" consumer reporting agencies to include

fraud alerts in consumer reports upon a consumer's request, and require

lenders who obtain a consumer report including a fraud alert to take certain

steps before granting credit in the consumer's name. These steps are different

depending on the type of alert in the consumer report.

The original purpose of fraud alerts - which were offered voluntarily for many

years by consumer reporting agencies, even before the requirement was

enacted into law - was to allow consumers who believed that they might be at

risk of identity theft to alert potential lenders and others to the increased fraud

risk.

The "nationwide" consumer reporting agencies - such as, Equifax, Experian, or

Trans Union - are now required by the FCRA to include a fraud alert in the file of

a consumer at the consumer's request. In addition, any other (non-nationwide)

consumer reporting agency which receives a request for a fraud alert must

provide consumers with information on how to contact nationwide consumer

reporting agencies and how to report concerns about identity theft to the

Federal Trade Commission.

The FCRA provides for three types of alerts:

an

an

an

"initial alert," which remains in the consumer's file for 1 year;

"extended alert," which stays in the consumer's file for 7 years; and

"active duty alert," which stays in the consumer's file for 12 months and is

intended to be used by servicemen and servicewomen who are on active

duty and therefore not likely to be applying for credit or engaging in other

business activity.

Initial alerts and active duty alerts must include a notice to users of a

consumer report that the consumer to whom the report relates "does not

authorize the establishment of any new credit plan or extension of credit .

. in

the name of the consumer, or issuance of an additional card on an existing

credit account requested by a consumer, or any increase in credit limit on an

existing credit account." A business that obtains a consumer report including a

fraud alert must take special steps to ensure that the application is not

fraudulent before using the report to grant credit. Specifically, the consumer

report user must "Lutilize) reasonable policies and procedures to form a

reasonable belief that the user knows the identity of the person making the

request tfor credit)." This is the same language used in the Address Discrepancy

Rule, and this language also is used in the USA-PATRIOT Act requirements to

establish a customer identification program. See, e.g., 31 C.F.R. S 1020.220(a)(2)

(providing that a bank's customer identification procedures "must enable the

bank to form a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of each

customer"). If the consumer to whom the consumer report relates has specified

a telephone number to be used for identity verification purposes, the consumer

report user must contact the consumer using that telephone number or "take

reasonable steps to verify the consumer's identity and confirm that the

application for a new credit plan is not the result of identity theft."

Extended alerts must include a notice to consumer report users that the

consumer does not authorize the establishment of a new credit plan or

extension of credit, or an additional card or a credit limit increase on an existing

account, and also must include a telephone number "or other reasonable

a consumer report containing an extended alert must contact the consumer "in

person" or using the specified contact method to "confirm that the application

for tcreditl is not the result of identity theft."

Thus an extended alert provides a consumer report user with less flexibility to

grant credit than does an initial alert or an active duty alert. A consumer report

user must contact the consumer directly when there is an extended alert in the

file, but may grant credit without contacting the consumer in the case of an

initial alert or an active duty alert by following reasonable procedures to verify

the credit applicant's identity.
As of September 21 , 201 8, the FCRA requires nationwide consumer reporting

agencies to place security freezes on consumer files at the direct request of the

consumer (or through the consumer's representative in the case of certain

"protected consumers"). Placement of a security freeze is available to all

consumers, not only those that have been victims of identity theft. In general,

once the file is frozen, no lender or other company may obtain a copy of the

consumer report without the consumer's authorization. However, there are

certain exceptions, such as an exception permitting disclosure of a consumer

report for review the consumer's existing account, even when the consumer's

file is frozen. If a third party requests access to a consumer report of a

consumer with respect to which a security freeze is in effect, where such request

is in connection with an application for credit, and the consumer does not allow

such consumer report to be accessed, the third party may treat the application

as incomplete.

Knowledge Check
If you obtain a consumer report containing an “initial alert” - i.e. one that remains in the file for 1 year - you must contact the consumer at the telephone number in the alert before extending credit to the consumer..
FALSE


Module 10: Identity Theft Red Flags Rule

Identity Theft Red Flags Rule

This module covers:

Requirements on users of consumer reports

Companies subject to the Red Flag Rules

Covered Accounts Risk Assessment

Development of Identity Theft Prevention Program

Section 615 - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Section 615

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

FCRA S 615. Requirements on users of consumer reports Las amended Dec.

18, 20101

(e) Red Flag Guidelines and Regulations Required

(1) Guidelines. The Federal banking agencies, the National Credit Union

Administration, the Federal Trade Commission, the Commodity Futures

Trading Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commission shall

jointly, with respect to the entities that are subject to their respective

enforcement authority under section 621 -

(A) establish and maintain guidelines for use by each financial institution

and each creditor regarding identity thett with respect to account

holders at, or customers of, such entities, and update such guidelines as

often as necessary;

(B) prescribe regulations requiring each financial institution and each

creditor to establish reasonable policies and procedures for

implementing the guidelines established pursuant to subparagraph (A),

to identify possible risks to account holders or customers or to the

safety and soundness of the institution or customers; and

(C) prescribe regulations applicable to card issuers to ensure that, if a

card issuer receives notification of a change of address for an existing

account, and within a short period of time (during at least the first 30

days after such notification is received) receives a request for an

additional or replacement card for the same account, the card issuer

may not issue the additional or replacement card, unless the card

issuer, in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures-

(i) notifies the cardholder of the request at the former address of the

cardholder and provides to the cardholder a means of promptly

reporting incorrect address changes;

(ii) notifies the cardholder of the request by such other means of

communication as the cardholder and the card issuer previously

agreed to; or

(iii) uses other means of assessing the validity of the change of

address, in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures

established by the card issuer in accordance with the regulations

prescribed under subparagraph (B).

(2) Criteria

(A) In general. In developing the guidelines required by paragraph (1 )(A),

the agencies described in paragraph (1 ) shall identify patterns, practices,

and specific forms of activity that indicate the possible existence of

identity theft.

(B) Inactive accounts. In developing the guidelines required by

paragraph (1 )(A), the agencies described in paragraph (1 ) shall consider

including reasonable guidelines providing that when a transaction

occurs with respect to a credit or deposit account that has been inactive

for more than 2 years, the creditor or financial institution shall follow

reasonable policies and procedures that provide for notice to be given

to a consumer in a manner reasonably designed to reduce the

likelihood of identity theft with respect to such accounts.

(3) Consistency with verification requirements. Guidelines established

pursuant to paragraph (1 ) shall not be inconsistent with the policies and

procedures required under section 531 8(l) of title 31, United States Code.

(4) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the term "creditor"

(A) means a creditor, as defined in section 702 of the Equal Credit

Opportunity Act (1 5 U.S.C. 1 691 a), that regularly and in the ordinary

course of business--

(i) obtains or uses consumer reports, directly or indirectly, in

connection with a credit transaction;

(ii) furnishes information to consumer reporting agencies, as

described in section 623, in connection with a credit transaction; or

(iii) advances funds to or on behalf of a person, based on an

obligation of the person to repay the funds or repayable from

specific property pledged by or on behalf of the person;

(B) does not include a creditor described in subparagraph (A)(iii) that

advances funds on behalf of a person for expenses incidental to a

service provided by the creditor to that person; and

(C) includes any other type of creditor, as defined in that section 702, as

the agency described in paragraph (1 ) having authority over that

creditor may determine appropriate by rule promulgated by that

agency, based on a determination that such creditor offers or maintains

accounts that are subject to a reasonably foreseeable risk of identity

theft.

12 C.F.R. S 1022.3 Identity theft.

*** Intervening Text ***

(g) "Identifying information" means any name or number that may be used,

alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,

including any:

(1 ) Name, social security number, date of birth, official State or government

issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number,

government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number;

(2) Unique biometric data, such as fingerprint, voice print, retina or iris

image, or other unique physical representation;

(3) Unique electronic identification number, address, or routing code; or

(4) Telecommunication identifying information or access device (as defined

in 18 U.S.C. 1029(e)).

(h) "Identity theft" means a fraud committed or attempted using the identifying

information of another person without authority.

*** Text Omitted ***

16 C.F.R. S 681.1 Duties regarding the detection, prevention, and

mitigation of identity theft.

(a) Scope. This section applies to financial institutions and creditors that are

subject to administrative enforcement of the FCRA bv the Federal Trade

Commission pursuant to LFCRA S 621 (a)(l

(b) Definitions. For purposes of this section, and Appendix A, the following

definitions apply:

(1 ) Account means a continuing relationship established by a person with a

financial institution or creditor to obtain a product or service for personal,

family, household or business purposes. Account includes:

(i) An extension of credit, such as the purchase of property or services

involving a deferred payment; and

(ii) A deposit account.

(2) The term board of directors includes:

(i) In the case of a branch or agency of a foreign bank, the managing

official in charge of the branch or agency; and

(ii) In the case of any other creditor that does not have a board of

directors, a designated employee at the level of senior management.

(3) Covered account means:

(i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains,

primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is

designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit

card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell

phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account;

and

(ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or

maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers

or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor

from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance,

reputation, or litigation risks.

(4) Credit has the same meaning as in LFCRA S

(5) Creditor has the same meaning as in LFCRA 5 and includes

lenders such as banks, finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage

brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications companies.

(6) Customer means a person that has a covered account with a financial

institution or creditor.

(7) Financial institution has the same meaning as in LFCRA 5

(8) Identity theft has the same meaning as in r 12 C.F.R. 1022.3(h)I.

(9) Red Flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the

possible existence of identity theft.

(10) Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the

financial institution or creditor.

(c) Periodic Identification of Covered Accounts. Each financial institution or

creditor must periodically determine whether it offers or maintains covered

accounts. As a part of this determination, a financial institution or creditor must

conduct a risk assessment to determine whether it offers or maintains covered

accounts described in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section, taking into

consideration:

(1 ) The methods it provides to open its accounts;

(2) The methods it provides to access its accounts; and

(3) Its previous experiences with identity theft.

(d) Establishment of an Identity Theft Prevention Program -

(1 ) Program requirement. Each financial institution or creditor that offers or

maintains one or more covered accounts must develop and implement a

written Identity Theft Prevention Program (Program) that is designed to

detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening

of a covered account or any existing covered account. The Program must be

appropriate to the size and complexity of the financial institution or creditor

and the nature and scope of its activities.

(2) Elements of the Program. The Program must include reasonable policies

and procedures to:

(i) Identify relevant Red Flags for the covered accounts that the financial

institution or creditor offers or maintains, and incorporate those Red

Flags into its Program;

(ii) Detect Red Flags that have been incorporated into the Program of

the financial institution or creditor;

(iii) Respond appropriately to any Red Flags that are detected pursuant

to paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this section to prevent and mitigate identity

theft; and

(iv) Ensure the Program (including the Red Flags determined to be

relevant) is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers

and to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor

from identity theft.

(e) Administration of the Program. Each financial institution or creditor that is

required to implement a Program must provide for the continued

administration of the Program and must:

(1) Obtain approval of the initial written Program from either its board of

directors or an appropriate committee of the board of directors;

(2) Involve the board of directors, an appropriate committee thereof, or a

designated employee at the level of senior management in the oversight,

development, implementation and administration of the Program;

(3) Train staff, as necessary, to effectively implement the Program; and

(4) Exercise appropriate and effective oversight of service provider

arrangements.

(f) Guidelines. Each financial institution or creditor that is required to implement

a Program must consider the guidelines in appendix A of this part and include

in its Program those guidelines that are appropriate.

Appendix A to Part 681 -Interagency Guidelines on Identity Theft

Detection, Prevention, and Mitigation

Section 681.1 of this part requires each financial institution and creditor that

offers or maintains one or more covered accounts, as defined in 5681.1 (b)(3) of

this part, to develop and provide for the continued administration of a written

Program to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft in connection with the

opening of a covered account or any existing covered account. These guidelines

are intended to assist financial institutions and creditors in the formulation and

maintenance of a Program that satisfies the requirements of S

part.

l. The Program

681.1 ofthis

In designing its Program, a financial institution or creditor may incorporate, as

appropriate, its existing policies, procedures, and other arrangements that

control reasonably foreseeable risks to customers or to the safety and

soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft.

ll. Identifying Relevant Red Flags

(a) Risk Factors. A financial institution or creditor should consider the

following factors in identifying relevant Red Flags for covered accounts, as

appropriate:

(1 ) The types of covered accounts it offers or maintains;

(2) The methods it provides to open its covered accounts;

(3) The methods it provides to access its covered accounts; and

(4) Its previous experiences with identity theft.

(b) Sources of Red Flags. Financial institutions and creditors should

incorporate relevant Red Flags from sources such as:

(1 ) Incidents of identity theft that the financial institution or creditor has

experienced;

(2) Methods of identity theft that the financial institution or creditor has

identified that reflect changes in identity theft risks; and

(3) Applicable supervisory guidance.

(c) Categories of Red Flags. The Program should include relevant Red Flags

from the following categories, as appropriate. Examples of Red Flags from

each of these categories are appended as supplement A to this appendix A.

(1) Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer

reporting agencies or service providers, such as fraud detection services;

(2) The presentation of suspicious documents;

(3) The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information, such

as a suspicious address change;

(4) The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a covered

account; and

(5) Notice from customers, victims of identity theft, law enforcement

authorities, or other persons regarding possible identity theft in

connection with covered accounts held by the financial institution or

creditor.

Ill. Detecting Red Flags

The Program's policies and procedures should address the detection of Red

Flags in connection with the opening of covered accounts and existing covered

accounts, such as by:

(a) Obtaining identifying information about, and verifying the identity of, a

person opening a covered account, for example, using the policies and

procedures regarding identification and verification set forth in the

Customer Identification Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. 531 8(l) t31

C.F.R. 1020.2201; and

(b) Authenticating customers, monitoring transactions, and verifying the

validity of change of address requests, in the case of existing covered

accounts.

IV. Preventing and Mitigating Identity Theft

The Program's policies and procedures should provide for appropriate

responses to the Red Flags the financial institution or creditor has detected that

are commensurate with the degree of risk posed. In determining an

appropriate response, a financial institution or creditor should consider

aggravating factors that may heighten the risk of identity theft, such as a data

security incident that results in unauthorized access to a customer's account

records held by the financial institution, creditor, or third party, or notice that a

customer has provided information related to a covered account held by the

financial institution or creditor to someone fraudulently claiming to represent

the financial institution or creditor or to a fraudulent website. Appropriate

responses may include the following:

(a) Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft;

(b) Contacting the customer;

(c) Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security devices that

permit access to a covered account;

(d) Reopening a covered account with a new account number;

(e) Not opening a new covered account;

(f) Closing an existing covered account;

(g) Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not selling a covered

account to a debt collector;

(h) Notifying law enforcement; or

(i) Determining that no response is warranted under the particular

circumstances.

V. Updating the Program

Financial institutions and creditors should update the Program (including the

Red Flags determined to be relevant) periodically, to reflect changes in risks to

customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor

from identity theft, based on factors such as:

(a) The experiences of the financial institution or creditor with identity theft;

(b) Changes in methods of identity theft;

(c) Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft;

(d) Changes in the types of accounts that the financial institution or creditor

offers or maintains; and

(e) Changes in the business arrangements of the financial institution or

creditor, including mergers, acquisitions, alliances, joint ventures, and

service provider arrangements.

VI. Methods for Administering the Program

(a) Oversight of Program. Oversight by the board of directors, an

appropriate committee of the board, or a designated employee at the level

of senior management should include:

(1 ) Assigning specific responsibility for the Program's implementation;

(2) Reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance by the

financial institution or creditor with 5 681.1 of this part; and

(3) Approving material changes to the Program as necessary to address

changing identity theft risks.

(b) Reports.

(1 ) In general. Staff of the financial institution or creditor responsible for

development, implementation, and administration of its Program

should report to the board of directors, an appropriate committee of

the board, or a designated employee at the level of senior management,

at least annually, on compliance by the financial institution or creditor

with S 681.1 of this part.

(2) Contents of report. The report should address material matters

related to the Program and evaluate issues such as: The effectiveness of

the policies and procedures of the financial institution or creditor in

addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of

covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; service

provider arrangements; significant incidents involving identity theft and

management's response; and recommendations for material changes to

the Program.

(c) Oversight of service provider arrangements. Whenever a financial

institution or creditor engages a service provider to perform an activity in

connection with one or more covered accounts the financial institution or

creditor should take steps to ensure that the activity of the service provider

is conducted in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures

designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft. For

example, a financial institution or creditor could require the service provider

by contract to have policies and procedures to detect relevant Red Flags

that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities, and

either report the Red Flags to the financial institution or creditor, or to take

appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft.

Vll. Other Applicable Legal Requirements

Financial institutions and creditors should be mindful of other related legal

requirements that may be applicable, such as:

(a) For financial institutions and creditors that are subject to 31 U.S.C.

531 8(g), filing a Suspicious Activity Report in accordance with applicable law

and regulation;

(b) Implementing any requirements under tFCRA S regarding the

circumstances under which credit may be extended when the financial

institution or creditor detects a fraud or active duty alert;

(c) Implementing any requirements for furnishers of information to

consumer reporting agencies under LFCRA 5 6231, for example, to correct or

update inaccurate or incomplete information, and to not report information

that the furnisher has reasonable cause to believe is inaccurate; and

(d) Complying with the prohibitions in LFCRA S 61 51 on the sale, transfer, and

placement for collection of certain debts resulting from identity theft.

Supplement A to Appendix A

In addition to incorporating Red Flags from the sources recommended in

section ll.b. of the Guidelines in Appendix A of this Dart, each financial

institution or creditor may consider incorporating into its Program, whether

singly or in combination, Red Flags from the following illustrative examples in

connection with covered accounts:

Alerts, Notifications or Warnings from a Consumer Reporting Agency

1 . A fraud or active duty alert is included with a consumer report.

2. A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of credit freeze in response to

a request for a consumer report.

3. A consumer reporting agency provides a notice of address discrepancy, as

defined in S 1 022.82(b) of this part.

4. A consumer report indicates a pattern of activity that is inconsistent with the

history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as:

a. A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;

b. An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;

c. A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently

established credit relationships; or

d. An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account

privileges by a financial institution or creditor.

Suspicious Documents

5. Documents provided for identification appear to have been altered or forged.

6. The Photograph or Physical description on the identification is not consistent
with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the identification.

7. Other information on the identification is not consistent with information

provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer presenting

the identification.

8. Other information on the identification is not consistent with readily

accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor,

such as a signature card or a recent check.

9. An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the

appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.


Suspicious Personal Identifying Information

10. Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when compared

against external information sources used by the financial institution or

creditor. For example:

a. The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or

b. The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the

Social Security Administration's Death Master File.

1 1 . Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent

with other personal identifying information provided by the customer. For

example, there is a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth.

12. Personal identifying information provided is associated with known

fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the

financial institution or creditor. For example:

a. The address on an application is the same as the address provided on a

fraudulent application; or

b. The phone number on an application is the same as the number provided

on a fraudulent application.

13. Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly associated

with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by

the financial institution or creditor. For example:

a. The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a prison; or

b. The phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager or answering

service.

14. The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons opening

an account or other customers.

15. The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the

address or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of other

persons opening accounts or by other customers.

16. The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to provide all

required personal identifying information on an application or in response to

notification that the application is incomplete.

17. Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with personal

identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor.

18. For financial institutions and creditors that use challenge questions, the

person opening the covered account or the customer cannot provide

authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available

from a wallet or consumer report.

Unusual Use of, or Suspicious Activity Related to, the Covered Account

19. Shortly following the notice of a change of address for a covered account,

the institution or creditor receives a request for a new, additional, or

replacement card or a cell phone, or for the addition of authorized users on the

account.

20. A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated

with known patterns of fraud. For example:

a. The majority of available credit is used for cash advances or merchandise

that is easily convertible to cash (e.g., electronics equipment or jewelry); or

b. The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment

but no subsequent payments.

21 . A covered account is used in a manner that is not consistent with

established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example:

a. Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;

b. A material increase in the use of available credit;

c. A material change in purchasing or spending patterns;

d. A material change in electronic fund transfer patterns in connection with

a deposit account; or

e. A material change in telephone call patterns in connection with a cellular

phone account.

22. A covered account that has been inactive for a reasonably lengthy period of

time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected

pattern of usage and other relevant factors).

23. Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although

transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's

covered account.

24. The financial institution or creditor is notified that the customer is not

receiving paper account statements.

25. The financial institution or creditor is notified of unauthorized charges or

transactions in connection with a customer's covered account.

Notice from Customers, Victims of Identity_ Theft, Law Enforcement Authorities,

or Other Persons Regarding Possible Identity Theft in Connection With Covered

Accounts Held by the Financial Institution or Creditor

26. The financial institution or creditor is notified by a customer, a victim of

identity theft, a law enforcement authority, or any other person that it has

opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.


Section 615(e) - Explanation

Explanation of Section 615(e)

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Requirements on users of consumer reports Las amended Dec. 18, 2010)

Section 61 5(e) requires the federal financial regulatory agencies to make rules

requiring certain companies that are subject to their jurisdiction to develop

programs to detect, prevent, and mitigate the harm resulting from identity

theft.

The term "identity theft" in this context means "a fraud committed or

attempted using the identifying information of another person without

authority." Classic identity theft occurs when an impostor opens a credit

account in another person's name fraudulently and without authority.

These rules are popularly known as the Identity Theft Red Flag Rules, or simply

"Red Flag Rules." They are referred to as the Red Flag Rules because they

require companies to detect certain "red flags" or indicators of identity theft

and related fraud, and then respond to those red flags to stop the possible

fraud before it occurs, or mitigate the possible harm to consumers from the

fraud.

(The rulemaking agencies are the Federal banking agencies (the Federal

Reserve Board, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance

Corporation and the Office of Thrift Supervision), the National Credit Union

Administration, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the Securities

and Exchange Commission for regulated entities. Non-banks and non-

securities firms are subject to rules made by the Federal Trade Commission.

For the purposes of this discussion, we have cited to and relied upon the rules

made by the Federal Trade Commission, but we note that all of the rules are

substantially identical. We refer in this discussion to the rulemaking agencies as

"the Agencies.")

Companies Subject to the Red Flag Rules

"Financial institutions" and certain "creditors" are subject to the Red Flag Rules.

The term "financial institution" includes a bank, as well as any another person

that holds "transaction accounts" for consumers. The term "transaction

account" has the same meaning as in Federal Reserve Act S 1 9(b), and includes

a deposit account. See 12 U.S.C. S 461 (Federal Reserve Act).

The term "creditor" has the same meaning as in the Equal Credit Opportunity

Act-i.e., someone who regularly extends credit, with "credit" being defined as

any right to defer payment. 15 U.S.C. S 1 691 a(d) (Equal Credit Opportunity Act).

Accepting payment by credit card does not constitute the "extension of credit"

under the Red Flag Rules.

The Federal Trade Commission staff has indicated that simple invoicing for

services - such as, "net 30 days" payment terms - would constitute "credit"

under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, and therefore would be considered to

be "credit" for the purposes of the Red Flag Rules. As a result of the Federal

Trade Commission staffs interpretation, Congress amended the definition of

"creditor" for the purposes of the Red Flag Rules to mean only a "creditor" that

(1 ) obtains or uses consumer reports in connection with a credit transaction; (2)

furnishes information to consumer reporting agencies in connection with a

credit transaction; or (3) advances funds to or on behalf of a person, based on

an obligation of the person to repay the funds or repayable from specific

property pledged as collateral. This means that a company that permits its

customers to pay in arrears is not automatically subject to the Red Flag Rules. It

is only when the company pulls a credit report in connection with a credit

transaction (i.e., an employment, tenant screening or other non-credit

transaction would not count), or furnishes information to a consumer reporting

agency in connection with a credit transaction, or actually advances cash money

to a borrower with the expectation of repayment that the company will be

covered by the Red Flag Rules.

In other words, the companies subject to the Red Flags Rules are as follows:

Banks;

Persons holding transaction accounts for consumers; and

"Creditors" that also pull credit reports, furnish data to consumer reporting

agencies or extend loans to borrowers.

Covered Accounts Risk Assessment

The Rules require each covered "creditor" and "financial institution" to

determine periodically whether it offers or maintains "covered accounts."

The

term "covered account" is defined in pertinent part as a continuing relationship

with a customer that: (1) permits multiple transactions and is primarily for

personal, family, or household purposes; or (2) presents a "reasonably

foreseeable risk to customers or to ... safety and soundness ... from identity

theft." 16 C.F.R. S 681.1(b)(3). That is, consumer accounts that permit multiple

transactions are covered by the Rules without regard to whether the

relationship presents a risk of identity theft, and other customer relationships,

including commercial accounts, that present a reasonably foreseeable risk of
harm trom identity thett to customers or to the satety and soundness ot the

covered "creditor" and "financial institution" also are "covered accounts" under

the Rules. In other words, there are two types of "covered accounts": one is an

account used mostly for personal, family, or household purposes, and the other

is one for which there is a foreseeable risk of identity theft. For example, one

type of account that should be considered for coverage because it may be

vulnerable to identity theft is a small business or sole proprietorship account.

To determine whether non-consumer accounts are "covered" - i.e., whether a

risk of identity theft is "reasonably foreseeable" - a creditor must consider the

methods it provides to open and access accounts, as well as its previous


experiences with identity theft. In addition, the Agencies have specified that

the term "risk" includes: (1) financial risk; (2) operational risk; (3) compliance

risk; (4) reputation risk; and (5) litigation risk.

Development of Identity Theft Prevention Program

The Rules also require any covered creditor or financial institution that has

determined that it offers or maintains one or more "covered accounts" to

"develop and implement a written Identity Theft Prevention Program ... that is

designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft in connection with the

opening of a covered account or any existing covered account." As indicated

above, identity theft is defined as fraud committed or attempted using

someone else's identifying information, such as name, Social Security number

or financial account number. This type of fraud might occur in connection with

new accounts - such as an impostor taking out a loan in someone else's name -

or existing accounts - such as a fraudster accessing a deposit account or using a

stolen card to obtain goods or services. All of these types of fraud are covered

by the Red Flag Rules.

The Rules require that the written Identity Theft Prevention Program must be

approved by the Board of Directors of the covered creditor or financial

institution (or by a committee of the Board), must be overseen by senior

management, must include staff training and oversight of service providers, and

must be updated to consider new threats as they arise. Covered entities also

must consider Guidelines provided by the Agencies when developing an Identity

Theft Prevention Program. See 16 C.F.R. pt. 681, App. A ("Interagency Guidelines

on Identity Theft Detection, Prevention, and Mitigation").

The Guidelines recommend that covered entities, as a part of their Identity

Theft Prevention Program, identify relevant "Red Flags" - defined as patterns,

practices, or activities that indicate the possible existence of identity theft. An

Identity Theft Prevention Program also should include procedures to detect the

identified Red Flags and to respond when Red Flags are detected.

As an example, a lender might identify as one of its "Red Flags" - or indicators of

possible identity fraud - a loan applicant without a valid Social Security number.

To detect this Red Flag, the lender might require its loan officers to ask all loan

applicants for their Social Security number, and then compare that Social

Security number against a database from a third-party vendor that indicates

whether that particular Social Security number has been reported as being

associated with an individual with the same name and date of birth as the loan

applicant. If the Social Security number does not match the loan applicant, the

lender then must have procedures in place to respond to the red flag - for

example, the loan officer might ask the loan applicant to repeat his or her

Social Security number to make sure that the loan officer transcribed the

number correctly, the loan officer might ask the applicant for additional forms

of identification, or the loan officer might end the transaction.

The Guidelines recommend that, when identifying Red Flags, covered entities

"should consider" the types of covered accounts that they offer or maintain, the

methods of opening and accessing such accounts, and their previous

experiences with identity theft. Covered entities should incorporate Red Flags

from their own experience with fraudulent transactions, and should consider

new methods of identity theft that they read or hear about, as well as any

"applicable supervisory guidance." The Agencies have also developed a list of

possible Red Flags to help creditors and financial institutions identify Red Flags:

Alerts and notifications received from credit bureaus and third-party service

providers, such as fraud alerts, address discrepancy notices, credit freezes,

and unusual patterns of activity on credit report;

Presentation of suspicious documents or suspicious identifying information,

such as identification cards that appear altered or forged, inconsistent

identity information, an invalid Social Security number, or an address that is
a mail-drop;

Unusual or suspicious account usage patterns, such as changes in account

usage or purchase of jewelry and electronics; or

Notices from customers, identity theft victims, or law enforcement.

The Guidelines also include recommendations for detecting Red Flags. At

account opening, the Guidelines suggest that covered creditors and financial

institutions verify the identity of applicant, such as by following the Customer

Identification Procedures required under the USA PATRIOT Act. With respect to

existing accounts the Guidelines suggest that covered creditors and financial

institutions should authenticate customers who are engaging in transactions,

monitor transactions for unusual account usage, and verify the validity of

customer change-of-address requests.

With respect to responding to Red Flags, the Guidelines do not require any

specific approach, but merely suggest that covered creditors and financial

institutions provide for appropriate responses to Red Flags that are

commensurate with the risk presented. Covered entities also should consider

aggravating factors, such as account compromises that follow data security

breaches or phishing incidents. Possible appropriate responses include:

monitoring accounts; contacting customers; changing passwords or PINs;

closing accounts or assigning new account numbers; not opening a new

account; not attempting to collect an account; notifying law enforcement; and

determining that no response is necessary.

Covered creditors and financial institutions should provide for the ongoing

administration of the Identity Theft Prevention Program. The Guidelines

recommend that the Board of directors or senior management assign specific

responsibility for implementation to a member of the staff, review all reports by

staff, and approve material changes to program. The staff should report at

least annually on the effectiveness of the Identity Theft Prevention Program,

significant security incidents, and recommendations for material changes to the

Identity Theft Prevention Program. It also is important that any service

providers that might play a role in preventing identity theft - for example,

vendors to which account origination or servicing has been outsourced -

understand what they need to do to under the Identity Theft Prevention

Program, and are obligated, preferably by written contract, to assist in the

detection, prevention and mitigation of identity theft.
Module 11: Employment Reports & Background Screening

Employment Purposes

The FCRA recognizes the importance of using consumer reports for

employment purposes. This section of the law:

Addresses the use of adverse public record data in employment reports.

Discusses disclosure requirements.

Discusses the need to make sure this information is "complete and up

to date."

Section 604(b) - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Sections 604(b) and 613

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(h) - Definition of "employment purposes"

The term "employment purposes" when used in connection with a consumer report

means a report used for the purpose of evaluating a consumer for employment,

promotion, reassignment or retention as an employee.

Section 604(b) Conditions for furnishing and using consumer reports for

employment purposes.-

(1 ) Certification from user.-A consumer reporting agency may furnish a consumer

report for employment purposes only if-

(A) the person who obtains such report from the agency certifies to the

agency that

(i) the person has complied with paragraph (2) with respect to the

consumer report, and the person will comply with paragraph (3) with

respect to the consumer report if paragraph (3) becomes applicable; and

(ii) information from the consumer report will not be used in violation of

any applicable Federal or State equal employment opportunity law or

regulation; and

(B) the consumer reporting agency provides with the report, or has previously

provided, a summary of the consumer's rights under this title, as prescribed

by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau) under section 609(c)(3).

(2) Disclosure to consumer.-

(A) In general.-Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a person may not

procure a consumer report, or cause a consumer report to be procured, for

employment purposes with respect to any consumer, unless

(i) a clear and conspicuous disclosure has been made in writing to the

consumer at any time before the report is procured or caused to be

procured, in a document that consists solely of the disclosure, that a

consumer report may be obtained for employment purposes; and

(ii) the consumer has authorized in writing (which authorization may be

made on the document referred to in clause (i)) the procurement of the

report by that person.

(B) Application by mail, telephone, computer, or other similar means.-lf a

consumer described in subparagraph (C) applies for employment by mail,

telephone, computer, or other similar means, at any time before a consumer

report is procured or caused to be procured in connection with that

application

(i) the person who procures the consumer report on the consumer for

employment purposes shall provide to the consumer, by oral, written, or

electronic means, notice that a consumer report may be obtained for

employment purposes, and a summary of the consumer's rights under

section 61 5(a)(3); and

(ii) the consumer shall have consented, orally, in writing, or electronically

to the procurement of the report by that person.

(C) Scope. Subparagraph (B) shall apply to a person procuring a consumer

report on a consumer in connection with the consumer's application for

employment only if--

(i) the consumer is applying for a position over which the Secretary of

Transportation has the power to establish qualifications and maximum

hours of service pursuant to the provisions of section 31502 of title 49, or

a position subject to safety regulation by a State transportation agency;

and

(ii) as of the time at which the person procures the report or causes the

report to be procured the only interaction between the consumer and

the person in connection with that employment application has been by

mail, telephone, computer, or other similar means.

(3) Conditions on use for adverse actions.

(A) In general.-Except as provided in subparagraph (B), in using a consumer

report for employment purposes, before taking any adverse action based in

whole or in part on the report, the person intending to take such adverse

action shall provide to the consumer to whom the report relates

(i) a copy of the report; and

(ii) a description in writing of the rights of the consumer under this title, as

prescribed by the LConsumer Financial Protection Bureau under section

(B) Application by mail, telephone, computer, or other similar means.-

(i) If a consumer described in subparagraph (C) applies for employment

by mail, telephone, computer, or other similar means, and if a person

who has procured a consumer report on the consumer for employment

purposes takes adverse action on the employment application based in

whole or in part on the report, then the person must provide to the

consumer to whom the report relates, in lieu of the notices required

under subparagraph (A) of this section and under section 61 5(a), within 3

business days of taking such action, an oral, written or electronic

notification-

(l) that adverse action has been taken based in whole or in part on a

consumer report received from a consumer reporting agency;

(Il) of the name, address and telephone number of the consumer

reporting agency that furnished the consumer report (including a toll-

free telephone number established by the agency if the agency

compiles and maintains files on consumers on a nationwide basis);

(Ill) that the consumer reporting agency did not make the decision to

take the adverse action and is unable to provide to the consumer the

specific reasons why the adverse action was taken; and

(IV) that the consumer may, upon providing proper identification,

request a free copy of a report and may dispute with the consumer

reporting agency the accuracy or completeness of any information in

a report.

(ii) If, under clause (B)(i)(lV), the consumer requests a copy of a consumer

report from the person who procured the report, then, within 3 business

days of receiving the consumer's request, together with proper

identification, the person must send or provide to the consumer a copy of

a report and a copy of the consumer's rights as prescribed by the

LConsumer Financial Protection Bureau) under section 609(c)(3).

(C) Scope. Subparagraph (B) shall apply to a person procuring a consumer

report on a consumer in connection with the consumer's application for

employment only if-

(i) the consumer is applying for a position over which the Secretary of

Transportation has the power to establish qualifications and maximum

hours of service pursuant to the provisions of section 31502 of title 49, or

a position subject to safety regulation by a State transportation agency;

and

(ii) as of the time at which the person procures the report or causes the

report to be procured the only interaction between the consumer and

the person in connection with that employment application has been by

mail, telephone, computer, or other similar means.

Section 604(b)(4) (exemption for national security investigations) is omitted from the

FCRA language.

Section 613: Public Record Information for Employment Purposes

(a) In general.-A consumer reporting agency which furnishes a consumer report for

employment purposes and which for that purpose compiles and reports items of

information on consumers which are matters of public record and are likely to have

an adverse effect upon a consumer's ability to obtain employment shall-

(1) at the time such public record information is reported to the user of such

consumer report, notify the consumer of the fact that public record information

Section 613: Public Record Information for Employment Purposes

(a) In general.-A consumer reporting agency which furnishes a consumer report for

employment purposes and which for that purpose compiles and reports items of

information on consumers which are matters of public record and are likely to have

an adverse effect upon a consumer's ability to obtain employment shall-

(1) at the time such public record information is reported to the user of such

consumer report, notify the consumer of the fact that public record information

is being reported by the consumer reporting agency, together with the name and

address of the person to whom such information is being reported; or

(2) maintain strict procedures designed to insure that whenever public record

information which is likely to have an adverse effect on a consumer's ability to

obtain employment is reported it is complete and up to date. For purposes of

this paragraph, items of public record relating to arrests, indictments,

convictions, suits, tax liens, and outstanding judgments shall be considered up to

date if the current public record status of the item at the time of the report is

reported.

Section 61 3(b) (exemption for national security investigations) is omitted from the

FCRA language.

Section 604(b) - Explanation


Explanation of FCRA Law: Sections 604(b) and 613

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 604(b) - For Employment Purposes

The FCRA imposes special obligations on businesses that use consumer reports for

employment purposes - i.e., to hire and fire people. Congress recognized that

employment transactions are particularly sensitive and important to consumers, and

for that reason, built extra consumer protections into the law when consumer

reports are used to make employment decisions.

"Employment purposes" is broadly defined under the FCRA, and does not just cover

hiring and firing - it includes any evaluation "for employment, promotion,

reassignment or retention as an employee." In addition, regulatory agencies and

courts have stated that the term is even broader than "employees" and can include

individuals who are hired as independent contractors.

Special Requirements for Users

When obtaining a consumer report for employment purposes, a business must first

notify the individual in writing that a consumer report will be obtained, and must

obtain the individual's written authorization. (For other "permissible purposes"

under the FCRA, such as credit or insurance transactions, no consumer consent is

required.) The Federal Trade Commission staff has said that this authorization to

obtain a consumer report may be obtained at the beginning of the employment

relationship and maintained in the consumer's employment file to be used when

needed, so long as it is clear that the authorization encompasses future reports.

A user of an employment report must provide an adverse action notice after taking

adverse action against an employee or job applicant, such as firing or reassigning an

employee or refusing to hire a job applicant. In addition, however, a user of an

employment report must provide a special notice before taking adverse action based

on an employment report - this special "pre-adverse action notice" consists of a copy

of the consumer report itself, as well as a summary of the individual's rights under

the FCRA. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has prepared a special form

"Summary of FCRA Rights" notice that can be used for this purpose, and the FCRA

requires the consumer reporting agency to provide a copy of this summary to the

user of the employment report: https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-201 8-09-

1 8/pdf/201 8-201 84.pdf

The business also must make special certifications to the consumer reporting agency

that provides the consumer report. It must certify that it will comply with the special

FCRA requirements for employment reports, and it also must certify that it will not

use any information from the consumer report in violation of any applicable Federal

or State equal employment opportunity law or regulation.

The FCRA employment reporting provisions include a special set of exceptions that

enable employers to obtain consent and provide the pre-adverse action notices

electronically or by telephone where the consumer is "applying for a position over

which the Secretary of Transportation has the power to establish qualifications and

maximum hours of service pursuant to the provisions of L49 U.S.C. 5 31 5021, or a

position subject to safety regulation by a State transportation agency." These

lengthy and detailed exceptions are intended to allow companies to obtain

consumer reports to conduct background screening on long-haul truckers -

particularly independent owner-operators who may own their own trucks and are

frequently engaged to retrieve and deliver cargo over the telephone or by email. In

these limited circumstances, the law specifically allows consent to be obtained and

notices to be delivered other than in writing.

We note, however, that, since these provisions for truckers were added to the FCRA,

Congress has enacted the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce

Act, 15 U.S.C. SS 7001 et seq., which should permit the FCRA consent to be obtained

electronically and should permit disclosures to be sent electronically or by email.

Special Requirements for Consumer Reporting Agencies

The FCRA also includes special obligations for consumer reporting agencies that

provide consumer reports for employment purposes. For instance, as mentioned, a

consumer reporting agency must provide the user of the report a copy of the CFPB's

"Summary of FCRA Rights" to provide to the consumer with any pre-adverse action

notice.

In addition, before the consumer reporting agency "reports items of information ...

which are matters of public record and are likely to have an adverse effect upon a

consumer's ability to obtain employment," the consumer reporting agency shall

either:

(1) notify the consumer that public record information is being reported by the

consumer reporting agency, together with the name and address of the person

to whom such information is being reported; or

(2) maintain "strict procedures designed to insure" that the potentially

derogatory public record information is "complete and up to date."

The law provides further that "items of public record relating to arrests, indictments,

convictions, suits, tax liens, and outstanding judgments shall be considered up to

date if the current public record status of the item at the time of the report is

reported."


Knowledge Check
A consumer must give his/her written authorization before a consumer report can be provided for employment purposes.
TRUE
Adverse public record data used in an employment report may be considered to be up-to-date if the current public record status is included in the consumer report.
TRUE

Module 12: Investigative Consumer Reports

Investigative Consumer Reports

The FCRA imposes special duties on

companies that use "investigative

consumer reports," which are consumer

reports based on information obtained

from personal interviews with neighbors,

friends, or associates of the consumer.

Section 603(e), 606 - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Section 603 (e), 606

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 603(e) - Definition of investigative consumer report

The term "investigative consumer report" means a consumer report or portion

thereof in which information on a consumer's character, general reputation,

personal characteristics, or mode of living is obtained through personal interviews

with neighbors, friends, or associates of the consumer reported on or with others

with whom he is acquainted or who may have knowledge concerning any such items

of information. However, such information shall not include specific factual

information on a consumer's credit record obtained directly from a creditor of the

consumer or from a consumer reporting agency when such information was

obtained directly from a creditor of the consumer or from the consumer.

Section 606 Disclosure of investigative consumer reports

(a) Disclosure of fact of preparation

A person may not procure or cause to be prepared an investigative consumer report

on any consumer unless-

(1 ) it is clearly and accurately disclosed to the consumer that an investigative

consumer report including information as to his character, general reputation,

personal characteristics, and mode of living, whichever are applicable, may be

made, and such disclosure

(A) is made in a writing mailed, or otherwise delivered, to the consumer, not

later than three days after the date on which the report was first requested,

and

(B) includes a statement informing the consumer of his right to request the

additional disclosures provided for under subsection (b) of this section and

the written summary of the rights of the consumer prepared pursuant to

LFCRA S and

(2) the person certifies or has certified to the consumer reporting agency that-

(A) the person has made the disclosures to the consumer required by

paragraph (1); and

(B) the person will comply with subsection (b) of this section.

(b) Disclosure on request of nature and scope of investigation

Any person who procures or causes to be prepared an investigative consumer report

on any consumer shall, upon written request made by the consumer within a

reasonable period of time after the receipt by him of the disclosure required by

subsection (a)(l) of this section, make a complete and accurate disclosure of the

nature and scope of the investigation requested. This disclosure shall be made in a

writing mailed, or otherwise delivered, to the consumer not later than five days after

the date on which the request for such disclosure was received from the consumer

or such a report was first requested, whichever is the later.

(c) Limitation on liability upon showing of reasonable procedures for compliance

with provisions

No person may be held liable for any violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section

if he shows by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time of the violation he

maintained reasonable procedures to assure compliance with subsection (a) or (b) of

this section.

(d) Prohibitions

(1 ) Certification

A consumer reporting agency shall not prepare or furnish an investigative

consumer report unless the agency has received a certification under subsection

(a)(2) of this section from the person who requested the report.

(2) Inquiries

A consumer reporting agency shall not make an inquiry for the purpose of

preparing an investigative consumer report on a consumer for employment

purposes if the making of the inquiry by an employer or prospective employer of

the consumer would violate any applicable Federal or State equal employment

opportunity law or regulation.

(3) Certain public record information

Except as otherwise provided in LFCRA S 61 31, a consumer reporting agency shall

not furnish an investigative consumer report that includes information that is a

matter of public record and that relates to an arrest, indictment, conviction, civil

judicial action, tax lien, or outstanding judgment, unless the agency has verified

the accuracy of the information during the 30-day period ending on the date on

which the report is furnished.

(4) Certain adverse information

A consumer reporting agency shall not prepare or furnish an investigative

consumer report on a consumer that contains information that is adverse to the

interest of the consumer and that is obtained through a personal interview with

a neighbor, friend, or associate of the consumer or with another person with

whom the consumer is acquainted or who has knowledge of such item of

information, unless-

(A) the agency has followed reasonable procedures to obtain confirmation of

the information, from an additional source that has independent and direct

knowledge of the information; or

(B) the person interviewed is the best possible source of the information.

Section 606 - Explanation

Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 606

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 606 - Disclosure of Investigative Consumer Reports

An "investigative consumer report" is a consumer report, or a part of a consumer

report, which is obtained from personal interviews with neighbors, friends, or

associates of the consumer. It does not include traditional "credit report"

information - such as, "information on a consumer's credit record obtained directly

from a creditor of the consumer or obtained from a consumer reporting agency

which obtained The information) directly from a creditor."

Investigative consumer reports are sometimes obtained in connection with

employment transactions, life insurance applications, or large-dollar credit or

insurance transactions. Businesses that obtain investigative consumer reports, as

well as the consumer reporting agencies that prepare the reports, have special

obligations under the FCRA.

Obligations of Businesses that Obtain Reports

When obtaining an investigative consumer report, a business must notify the

individual that an investigative consumer report will be obtained, inform the

consumer that he or she has the right to obtain "a complete and accurate disclosure

of the nature and scope of the investigation," and provide the consumer with a copy

of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's form "Summary of FCRA Rights"

https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2018-09-18/pdf/2018-20184.pdf

notice:

A business that obtains an investigative consumer report must also, upon the

written request of the consumer, "make a complete and accurate disclosure of the

nature and scope of the investigation requested," in writing, within five days of the

consumer's request or the user's receipt of the investigative consumer report,

whichever is later. Disclosure of the "nature and scope" of the investigation should

include a complete and accurate description of the types of questions asked, the

number and types of persons interviewed, and the name and address of the

investigating agency. This section does not require the report user to disclose the

names of sources of information, or to provide the consumer with a copy of the

report.

Finally, the user of the report must specifically certify to the consumer reporting

agency that prepares the investigative consumer report that the user will comply

with the special FCRA requirements for investigative consumer reports.

Knowledge Check
You must obtain a consumer’s consent before obtaining an investigative consumer report about the consumer.
FALSE

Module 13: Enforcement & Remedies

Enforcement & Penalties

The module "Enforcement & Penalties" contains the following subsections:

You must access each subsection sequentially. Click on a button below to access each subsection.

Civil Liability for Willful Noncompliance

Civil Liability for Negligent Noncompliance (Unauthorized Disclosure)

Administrative Enforcement

Civil Liability for Willful Noncompliance

Civil Liability for Willful Non-compliance

Consumers are able to bring actions for a "willful" failure to comply with

the FCRA, and obtain sizable penalties.

Section 616 - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: Section 616

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Civil Liability for Willful Noncompliance

(a) In general

Any person who willfully fails to comply with any requirement imposed under this

title with respect to any consumer is liable to that consumer in an amount equal to

the sum of-

(A) any actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure

or damages of not less than $100 and not more than $1 ,000; or

(B) in the case of liability of a natural person for obtaining a consumer report

under false pretenses or knowingly without a permissible purpose, actual

damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure or $1 ,000,

whichever is greater;

(2) such amount of punitive damages as the court may allow; and

(3) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under this section,

the costs of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees as determined

by the court.
(b) Civil liability for knowing noncompliance

Any person who obtains a consumer report from a consumer reporting agency

under false pretenses or knowingly without a permissible purpose shall be liable to

the consumer reporting agency for actual damages sustained by the consumer

reporting agency or $1 ,000, whichever is greater.

(c) Attorney's fees

Upon a finding by the court that an unsuccessful pleading, motion, or other paper

filed in connection with an action under this section was filed in bad faith or for


purposes of harassment, the court shall award to the prevailing party attorney's fees

reasonable in relation to the work expended in responding to the pleading, motion,

or other papers.

(d) Clarification of willful noncompliance

For the purposes of this section, any person who printed an expiration date on any

receipt provided to a consumer cardholder at a point of sale or transaction between

December 4, 2004, and June 3, 2008, but otherwise complied with the requirements

of section 605(g) Lof the FCRAJ for such receipt shall not be in willful noncompliance

with section 605(g) of the FCRA by reason of printing such expiration date on the receipt.


Section 616 - Explanation

Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 616

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 616 - Civil Liability for Willful Noncompliance

Any person who "willfully" fails to comply with any FCRA provision can be held liable

in a private lawsuit for actual damages or "statutory damages" of between $100 and

$1 ,000 per violation, in addition to the plaintiff's attorney fees and punitive

damages, if the court should decide to award punitive damages. The statutory

damages are the equivalent of civil penalties, insofar as they need not bear any

relation to the actual damages suffered by the plaintiff.

Class actions can be maintained under the FCRA, and, unlike other consumer credit

laws, such as the Truth-in-Lending Act or the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, there

is no cap on the amount of damages that a class of plaintiffs can collect.

In the case of Safeco v. Burr, 551 U.S. 47 (2007), the U.S. Supreme Court defined what

it means to act willfully under the FCRA. The court held that "willfulness" includes

reckless disregard of the FCRA's requirements, as well as a "knowing" violation of the

statute, and then further defined reckless conduct as an action entailing "an

unjustifiably high risk of harm that is either known or so obvious that it should be

known." The Safeco case involved allegations that defendant Safeco Insurance Co.

had failed to send "adverse action" notices to its customers as required by the FCRA.

Although the Court disagreed with the defendant's reading of the law and held that

it should have delivered adverse action notices to its customers, the Court

nonetheless applied the "recklessness" standard and held that Safeco did not act

willfully. According to the Court, defendant Safeco's reading of the FCRA was not

"objectively unreasonable," given the unclear statutory language and lack of relevant

guidance. Thus, under Safeco, a person cannot act willfully if they rely on an

interpretation of their FCRA duties that is not "objectively unreasonable."

Civil Liability for Negligent Noncompliance (Unauthorized Disclosure)

Civil Liability for Negligent Non-compliance

Consumers also are able to bring actions for a "negligent" failure to

comply with the FCRA. They cannot obtain "statutory damages" or

"punitive damages" for these violations, but can obtain actual damages, as

well as attorney's fees.

Section 617 - FCRA Law

FCRA Law: 617

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Section 617 - Civil Liability for Negligent Noncompliance

(a) In general.-Any person who is negligent in failing to comply with any requirement

imposed under this title with respect to any consumer is liable to that consumer in

an amount equal to the sum of:

(1) any actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure and;

(2) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under this section,

the costs of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees as determined

by the court.

(b) Attorney's fees.-On a finding by the court that an unsuccessful pleading, motion,

or other paper filed in connection with an action under this section was filed in bad

faith or for purposes of harassment, the court shall award to the prevailing party

attorney's fees reasonable in relation to the work expended in responding to the

pleading, motion, or other paper.

Section 617 - Explanation

Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 617

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Section 617 - Civil Liability for Negligent Noncompliance

Where an alleged violation is not "willful," but merely negligent, the plaintiff cannot

recover statutory damages or punitive damages, only actual damages and attorney's

fees.

Administrative Enforcement

Administrative Enforcement

This section of the FCRA deals with which government agencies have

enforcement responsibility under the law including:

State attorneys general

Office of the Comptroller of the Currency

National Credit Union Administration

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau

Securities and Exchange Commission

Federal Trade Commission

Section 621 - FCRA Law


FCRA Law: 621

Step 1: Read What The Law Says

Please be advised that the below only focuses on key selected sections ofthe FCRA

material.

Section 621: Administrative Enforcement

(a) Enforcement by Federal Trade Commission.--

(1) In general. The Federal Trade Commission shall be authorized to enforce

compliance with the requirements imposed by this title under the Federal Trade

Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.), with respect to consumer reporting

agencies and all other persons subject thereto, except to the extent that

enforcement of the requirements imposed under this title is specifically

committed to some other Government agency under any of subparagraphs (A)

through (G) of subsection (b)(l ), and subject to subtitle B of the Consumer

Financial Protection Act of 201 0, subsection (b). For the purpose of the exercise

by the Federal Trade Commission of its functions and powers under the Federal

Trade Commission Act, a violation of any requirement or prohibition imposed

under this title shall constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice in

commerce, in violation of section 5(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (1 5

U.S.C. 45(a)), and shall be subject to enforcement by the Federal Trade

Commission under section 5(b) of that Act with respect to any consumer

reporting agency or person that is subject to enforcement by the Federal Trade

Commission pursuant to this subsection, irrespective of whether that person is

engaged in commerce or meets any other jurisdictional tests under the Federal

Trade Commission Act. The Federal Trade Commission shall have such

procedural, investigative, and enforcement powers, including the power to issue

procedural rules in enforcing compliance with the requirements imposed under

this title and to require the filing of reports, the production of documents, and

the appearance of witnesses, as though the applicable terms and conditions of

The Federal Trade Commission Act was part of this title. Any person violating

any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to the penalties and entitled to

the privileges and immunities provided in the Federal Trade Commission Act as

though the applicable terms and provisions of such Act are part of this title.

(2) Penalties.-

(A) Knowing Violations. Except as otherwise provided by subtitle B of the

Consumer Financial Protection Act of 201 0, in the event of a knowing

violation, which constitutes a pattern or practice of violations of this title, the

Federal Trade Commission may commence a civil action to recover a civil

penalty in a district court of the United States against any person that

violates this title. In such action, such person shall be liable for a civil penalty

of not more than $3,993 per violation, based on a January 2019 inflation

adjustment.

(B) Determining Penalty Amount. In determining the amount of a civil

penalty under subparagraph (A), the court shall take into account the degree

of culpability, any history of such prior conduct, ability to pay, effect on ability

to continue to do business, and such other matters as justice may require.

(C) Limitation. Notwithstanding paragraph (2), a court may not impose any

civil penalty on a person for a violation of section 623(a)(1 ), unless the person

has been enjoined from committing the violation, or ordered not to commit

the violation, in an action or proceeding brought by or on behalf of the

Federal Trade Commission, and has violated the injunction or order, and the

court may not impose any civil penalty for any violation occurring before the

date of the violation of the injunction or order.

(b) Enforcement by Other Agencies.-

(1) In General. Subject to subtitle B of the Consumer Financial Protection Act of

201 0, compliance with the requirements imposed under this title with respect to

consumer reporting agencies, persons who use consumer reports from such

agencies, persons who furnish information to such agencies, and users of

information that are subject to section 61 5(d) shall be enforced under--

(A) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 181 8), by the

appropriate Federal banking agency, as defined in section 3(q) of the Federal

Deposit Insurance Act (1 2 U.S.C. 181 3(q)), with respect to--

(i) any national bank or State savings association, and any Federal branch

or Federal agency of a foreign bank;

(ii) any member bank of the Federal Reserve System (other than a

national bank), a branch or agency of a foreign bank (other than a Federal

branch, Federal agency, or insured State branch of a foreign bank), a

commercial lending company owned or controlled by a foreign bank, and

any organization operating under section 25 or 25A of the Federal

Reserve Act; and

(iii) any bank or Federal savings association insured by the Federal

Deposit Insurance Corporation (other than a member of the Federal

Reserve System) and any insured State branch of a foreign bank;

(B) the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.), by the Administrator

of the National Credit Union Administration with respect to any Federal credit

union;

(C) subtitle IV of title 49, United States Code, by the Secretary of

Transportation, with respect to all carriers subject to the jurisdiction of the

Surface Transportation Board;

(D) the Federal Aviation Act of 1 958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1301 et seq.), by the

Secretary of Transportation, with respect to any air carrier or foreign air

carrier subject to that Act;

(E) the Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921 (7 U.S.C. 181 et seq.) (except as

provided in section 406 of that Act), by the Secretary of Agriculture, with

respect to any activities subject to that Act;

(F) the Commodity Exchange Act, with respect to a person subject to the

jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission;

(G) the Federal securities laws, and any other laws that are subject to the

jurisdiction of the Securities and Exchange Commission, with respect to a

person that is subject to the jurisdiction of the Securities and Exchange

Commission; and

(H) subtitle E of the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 201 0, by the

Bureau, with respect to any person subject to this title.

(c) State Action for Violations

(1 ) Authority of states. In addition to such other remedies as are provided under

State law, if the chief law enforcement officer of a State, or an official or agency

designated by a State, has reason to believe that any person has violated or is

violating this title, the State--

(A) may bring an action to enjoin such violation in any appropriate United

States district court or in any other court of competent jurisdiction;

(B) subject to paragraph (5), may bring an action on behalf of the residents of

the State to recover--

(i) damages for which the person is liable to such residents under sections

616 and 617 PSS 1681 n and 168101 as a result of the violation:

(ii) in the case of a violation described in any of paragraphs (1 ) through (3)

of section 623(c) LS 1681 s-2J, damages for which the person would, but for

section 623(c), be liable to such residents as a result of the violation; or

(iii) damages of not more than $1 ,000 for each willful or negligent

violation; and

(C) in the case of any successful action under subparagraph (A) or (B), shall be

awarded the costs of the action and reasonable attorney fees as determined

by the court.

(2) Rights of federal regulators. The State shall serve prior written notice of any

action under paragraph (1 ) upon the Bureau and the Federal Trade Commission

or the appropriate Federal regulator determined under subsection (b) and

provide the Bureau and the Federal Trade Commission or appropriate Federal

regulator with a copy of its complaint, except in any case in which such prior

notice is not feasible, in which case the State shall serve such notice immediately

upon instituting such action. The Bureau and the Federal Trade Commission or

appropriate Federal regulator shall have the right--

(A) to intervene in the action;

(B) upon so intervening, to be heard on all matters arising therein;

(C) to remove the action to the appropriate United States district court; and

(D) to file petitions for appeal.

(3) Investigatory powers. For purposes of bringing any action under this

subsection, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the chief law enforcement

officer, or an official or agency designated by a State, from exercising the powers

conferred on the chief law enforcement officer or such official by the laws of such

State to conduct investigations or to administer oaths or affirmations or to

compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary and other

evidence.

(4) Limitation on state action while federal action pending. If the Bureau, the

Federal Trade Commission, or the appropriate Federal regulator has instituted a

civil action or an administrative action under section 8 of the Federal Deposit

Insurance Act for a violation of this title, no State may, during the pendency of

such action, bring an action under this section against any defendant named in

the complaint of the Bureau, the Federal Trade Commission, or the appropriate

Federal regulator for any violation of this title that is alleged in that complaint.

(5) Limitations on State actions for certain violations

(A) Violation of injunction required. A State may not bring an action against a

person under paragraph (1 )(B) for a violation described in any of paragraphs

(1 ) through (3) of section 623(c), unless-

(i) the person has been enjoined from committing the violation, in an

action brought by the State under paragraph (1 )(A); and

(ii) the person has violated the injunction.

(B) Limitation on damages recoverable. In an action against a person under

paragraph (1 )(B) for a violation described in any of paragraphs (1 ) through (3)

of section 623(c), a State may not recover any damages incurred before the

date of the violation of an injunction on which the action is based.

(d) Enforcement under other authority. For the purpose of the exercise by any

agency referred to in subsection (b) of its powers under any Act referred to in that

subsection, a violation of any requirement imposed under this title shall be deemed

to be a violation of a requirement imposed under that Act. In addition to its powers

under any provision of law specifically referred to in subsection (b), each of the

agencies referred to in that subsection may exercise, for the purpose of enforcing

compliance with any requirement imposed under this title any other authority

conferred on it by law.

(e) Regulatory Authority.--

(1) In General. The Bureau shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to

carry out the purposes of this title, except with respect to sections 61 5(e) and

628. The Bureau may prescribe regulations as may be necessary or appropriate

to administer and carry out the purposes and objectives of this title, and to

prevent evasions thereof or to facilitate compliance therewith. Except as

provided in section 1 029(a) of the Consumer Financial Protection Act of 201 0, the

regulations prescribed by the Bureau under this title shall apply to any person

that is subject to this title, notwithstanding the enforcement authorities granted

to other agencies under this section.

(2) Deference. Notwithstanding any power granted to any Federal agency under

this title, the deference that a court affords to a Federal agency with respect to a

determination made by such agency relating to the meaning or interpretation of

any provision of this title that is subject to the jurisdiction of such agency shall be

applied as if that agency were the only agency authorized to apply, enforce,

interpret, or administer the provisions of this title. The regulations prescribed by

the Bureau under this title shall apply to any person that is subject to this title,

notwithstanding the enforcement authorities granted to other agencies under

this section.

Subsections 621 (f) and (g) have been omitted - they are not directly relevant to

administrative enforcement of the FCRA by state and federal agencies.

Section 621 - Explanation


Explanation of FCRA Law: Section 621

Step 2: Understand What The Law Says

Explanation of Section 621 - Administrative Enforcement

This section provides for "administrative" enforcement of the FCRA, meaning

enforcement by federal and state agencies. For example, if you are a national bank,

the agency that enforces the FCRA against you is the Comptroller of the Currency; if

you are a federally chartered credit union, it is the National Credit Union

Administration. For non-banks and most other financial institutions without a

federal functional regulator, the enforcement agency is the Federal Trade

Commission. In addition, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau may enforce

this statute against companies within its enforcement jurisdiction, such as non-bank

lenders, debt collectors, and banks with assets of more than $10 billion.

Most agencies enforce the FCRA under their organic statutes, with all of the authority

to obtain injunctions, penalties, or other relief that they otherwise would have. For

example, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is able to obtain civil penalties

of in excess of one million dollars per day for companies within its jurisdiction.

Unlike the banking agencies and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the
Federal Trade Commission and state attorneys general are given special authority

under the FCRA to obtain civil penalties for violations of the statute. The Federal

Trade Commission can obtain $3,993 in civil penalties for each "knowing ' violation of

the FCRA that is part of a pattern or practice of violations, based on a January 2019

inflation adjustment. Recent settlement orders of the Federal Trade Commission,

including orders against companies accused of data furnishing violations, have

assessed civil penalties in excess of one million dollars.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau can assess penalties in three tiers-

beginning at up to $5,781 per violation, per day for the least serious law violations,

and can escalate up to $28,906 per violation per day for reckless violations, and even

up to $1,1 56,242 per violation, per day for the most egregious violations, based on

January 2018 inflation adjustment to the maximum penalty figures.

State attorneys general also can enforce the FCRA, and can obtain statutory

damages of up to $1 ,000 for each negligent or willful violation, in addition to costs

and attorney's fees. A state attorney general must notify the appropriate federal

agency before bringing an action under the FCRA, and must stand down while any

federal action is pending against the same company.

